Okay.
And we live John,
Donna her.
Thank you very much sir.
Very nice to see you.
It's my pleasure Joe.
Thank you for having me here.
A nice to be with a fellow fanny pack proponent as well and a now you have one
of the beautiful higher primate leather bags like that.
Huh?
Joe Rogan has just given me one of the most beautiful fanny pics than I've ever
seen in my life.
Um,
I wear a very cheap fanny pack and this,
this is a thing of beauty.
I was just telling Joe About my student Gordon Ryan was recently given a Gucci,
a fanny pack.
It's literally the most beautiful thing I've ever seen in my life.
When he wears it around me,
I get insanely jealous.
And which you buy one of those.
It's like an $800 just on the principle.
Just on principle.
I account buy an $800 fanny pack,
but I could definitely stab Gordon Ryan in the back with a knife and steal it
from a and blame it on Nicky Ryan.
I could do that.
Easily blame on his brother.
Absolutely.
Great TV series.
The fanny pack is making a comeback.
It's a slow comeback that a lot of people are reluctant to join there.
They're scared.
They,
they worry about their position in the sexual food chain with good reason.
By the way,
I don't know why.
I feel like anybody that won't fuck you because you have a fanny pack.
You don't want to fuck them.
They're too much work.
Strong point.
Essentially.
It's always a battle of a appearance versus function.
Fanny packs cold.
Very,
very low on a parents,
but very high on function.
I feel like that one bucks the trend.
I think you're right between this and the Gucci,
we've got something going on.
Yeah.
There's a video that I put up the other day of my,
uh,
archery game is techno hunt thing,
which is this big crazy elaborate thing.
I got more comments on the fact that I was wearing a fanny pack in the video
than anything.
Were they positive or negative comments?
Negative.
Yeah,
but that's my experience.
But that's just the internet.
The Internet is,
the Internet is extremely angry.
That's the first thing you learned about the Internet.
They you can,
you could literally save a baby's life [inaudible] and the 80% of the Internet
we'll call you an asshole for doing so.
It's a,
it doesn't matter what you do at the Internet is very angry.
Well,
what the Internet is is it shows what people are like when there's no social
cues.
When they're not in front of you,
they don't have to deal with like looking you in the eye and what weird little
hidden demons of jealousy and anger and resentment and it's a pretty sad stories
and that's what we're really like.
It's a,
it's not looking good for the human rights.
The kind of people that comment in general and what it shows you is that 99% of
what we call human goodness and politeness really comes out of fear of
consequences.
There's a lot of that for sure because there's no consequences when you talk on
the line,
but I think it's the quality of the people that are making those kinds of
comments.
Like I would say like if you look at Youtube comments like Michael Jordan is not
leaving youtube comments.
The people that leave Youtube comments and bitch and complain about things.
Usually everything's not going so fantastic in their own life.
But they have this forum now when they feel like if there's a video that has 3
million downloads,
they also are on that video.
They are at the,
they're there in the comments section.
You go to them,
they're a part of that unqualified.
No one asked him to be there.
Literally all you have to do is make an account.
No one has to know anything about your education,
the way your mind works,
what you've done with your life,
what mistakes you've made,
doesn't matter.
You are old fuck 66 and that's your name.
And you can say whatever you want and you'll,
your,
your comments are right there with everything else.
Yes.
It's,
it's fascinating to watch.
It's very galatarian,
but in a lot of ways it's also,
it's like,
boy,
um,
I don't know if that's the best way to get your information.
Yeah,
I think there's a lot of truth to that.
Yeah.
So John,
um,
you are one of the most fascinating characters in the world of Jujitsu.
And the world of martial arts.
And for people who are not aware of your background,
you started out,
correct me if I'm wrong,
um,
a philosophy student.
That's correct.
Yes.
And you were working as a bouncer and you were jacked,
right?
You're a power lifter at the time.
Yes.
And you wanted to figure out a way to defend yourself.
Um,
it wasn't really a question of wanting to figure out.
It was,
it was,
it was a pretty simple design that I had when I grew up in New Zealand.
Martial arts was almost entirely based around.
A striking pro is,
you'll back me up on this joke.
Um,
we're similar age.
Uh,
when we grew up,
uh,
the,
it's no exaggeration to say that the study of martial arts in English speaking
countries and North America,
western Europe,
et Cetera,
was absolutely dominated by the striking thoughts.
And,
um,
if you ask the average person who was the best fighter in the world,
they would typically say whoever was the best boxer in the world.
So in the 1980s,
Mike Tyson and wasn't just the best boxer in the world,
he was the best fighter in the world.
People always equated prowess and fighting with the ability to strike.
Um,
I grew up in that time period and so,
um,
I grew up doing,
uh,
setting kickbox.
He said as a teenager in New Zealand,
I came to the United States and for the first time,
and there's no wrestling culture in my country.
New Zealand has no wrestling culture.
It's one of the few countries where there's no indigenous Raceland culture.
There's,
there were,
but it was kind of lost in the sands of time.
Um,
when I grew up wrestling with something I saw once every four years,
the Olympics on TV.
And,
um,
I didn't even associate it with fighting,
to be honest with you.
I just Sorta as these strange sport with two guys tackled each other.
And,
um,
so I came to the United States and I was working as a bouncer.
Um,
America has much,
much more of a wrestling culture in it.
In,
in New Zealand when I grew up,
when you fought,
you were expected to fight with fists and if it went to the ground,
the two guys stood up and there was in fighting.
You stood up and he fought like a man.
That was the idea.
And um,
uh,
in the United States when I was bouncing,
I was absolutely shocked and impressed by the prowess of judo players and
wrestlers in street fighting,
working as a bounce.
I worked alongside them and I was massively impressed.
What year was this?
This isn't the early 1990s.
I ride the United States in 1991.
Um,
so I started working late night,
late 1991.
Um,
in New York City.
New York is a very,
very,
very different city back then.
It's,
it's like,
uh,
um,
it's almost like two different cities from what it is to be amazing.
How much it's chicken does.
The transformation is night and day.
It's become like a giant Tgi Fridays now is,
that's pretty much what New York City is.
Yeah.
Um,
did,
to give you an example,
uh,
I used to live on West End Avenue on the upper west side.
When I would come home from working in nightclubs at five 30 in the morning to
go to sleep,
there would be large numbers of street walking prostitutes on my block.
My Avenue,
if that,
if you saw even a single street walking prostitute in that area,
today would be front page news of the New York Times.
It would be so shocking.
So completely out of would literally just people's minds score is the best
example.
I'm square.
It was an extreme example because time square used to be all CD peep shows,
nothing but peep shows.
And now it's like Guy Fieri restaurants.
It's,
it's all television.
So the transformation is huge.
So that was the New York that I went into and uh,
it was a,
it was a violent New York.
Uh,
1991 I believe was the year with the highest murder rate in recorded history of
New York City.
So,
um,
it was a very,
very different New York City.
It's not what you see today.
So I came into this environment,
I saw all these people were incredibly adept and finding,
they were using grant,
linkedin,
nick to do to.
So this impressed me a lot.
Um,
at,
uh,
shortly after that time,
has always working.
Um,
I started to hear,
talk about this show,
this ultimate fighting show.
And there was this Brazilian guy who had beaten everyone,
he was wrestling people and strangling them and locking their arms,
things like desk people that the things that I'd never heard of.
So I,
I'd heard this and um,
uh,
one day I was teaching at Columbia University and a close friend of mine who was
also in the phd program came into my office.
It was office hours and he said,
John,
you know,
I know you work as a bounce them and I know,
uh,
you look at night and,
um,
I started doing this,
this marsh a lot.
It's called Brazilian Jujitsu and uh,
it's mostly fall on the ground.
I remember you said most of the flights you get into people that put down on the
ground and they wrestle.
And,
uh,
I was wondering if you would be interested in doing it.
And I was like Brazilian Jujitsu and yet I never associated Marshawn's with
Brazil for me,
martial arts,
you know,
Japan,
Korea,
Brazil.
Like what do they got capital wearing,
you know?
Right.
Who is this guy?
So I'm like Brazilian Jujitsu.
It isn't you to see like Japanese,
like what does it,
isn't it like a contradiction of terms like Brazil,
Jujitsu?
Um,
so this,
at the time I was around 230 pounds and this guy was,
couldn't be more than 140 and he don't have been training two weeks.
So,
um,
he goes to me,
you know,
we go in the ground and,
and we wrestle on the ground and I was like,
okay,
let me put you in a headlock and let's see what you can do.
So I shut the door of the office,
I cleared out the furniture,
this poor kid on the ground.
Now.
Um,
I had the only thing I knew how to do on the ground in those,
this was headlock people run and I,
you know,
as a strong guide,
it pretty nicely headlock and I'm so I grabbed my poor little friend and,
and throttled them with,
uh,
basically,
kids get timely type headlock.
And um,
uh,
to my shock and horror,
he started slipping around behind me and I started holding hotter and hotter and
then about two minutes when guy and I really had no real control over him and he
was starting to get around behind me.
Now I didn't know back attacks where I had complete naivety on the ground,
but I could feel something bad was happening.
Someone getting behind you,
isn't it for a good thing in a fight.
And,
uh,
I was getting tired,
my arms are getting tired,
I had no control over the guy.
And finally he's slept at night to stand up and run away.
And I said,
are you kidding me?
I'm twice your size.
You've been training to God damn weeks.
And if this was a real fight,
he would have got away from it.
And I'm tired.
That's not good.
And I was just saying,
if he did this in two weeks,
what could you do?
Some training?
So I was fascinated.
I went down,
um,
got completely destroyed on my first day.
Um,
or it was hilarious.
You know,
who was there on this first?
They,
Matt Serra was the most,
uh,
he was a blue belt at the time.
Um,
so even on that first day,
you met people that would become very important in your life later on.
And um,
I vowed to the moon and the stars that I would at least become competent and the
game,
I couldn't live with the idea that I was incompetent at an important element of
fighting.
I didn't want to be a world champ.
I didn't worry.
I just want to be competent.
And,
uh,
I believed it would make my bouncing work significantly easier.
That was absolutely true.
Um,
within a very,
very short period of time,
balancing got massively easier for me.
I've bought,
you knew,
you always get this cliched Jujitsu saves.
Judas was saved my life.
How many people need to hear people say that all the time?
Well,
I can think of without any question.
There are four times in my life that Jujitsu actually did save my life balance.
I can say that with complete honesty.
Um,
uh,
it's a cliche for most people,
but for me it's,
it did happen.
Um,
so it made a massive difference,
but I still saw it as something,
it was interesting and something I just wanted to gain competence in.
That fundamentally changed it really at that point I wanted to finish my phd and
become a professor.
That's what was my original goal when it came to United States.
Um,
but things started to change when,
uh,
the three senior students at the hands of Gracie Academy,
he caught all made a met Sarah and hold real Gracie.
All went their separate ways.
They had to go out and start their own schools and Hanzo was busy fighting
professionally,
Japan,
so he couldn't be at the academy all the time.
And he came to and he said,
John,
you're going to have to be a teacher.
Like there's no one else.
And how long have you been training?
Uh,
I believe if I go to the,
it was around four years.
I believe I was a purple belt when I first started teaching at hands.
Those,
um,
don't quote me on that,
but I'll have to go back and check.
But I believe that's,
and why did he come to you?
Um,
probably because he felt sorry for me.
I don't know.
Um,
uh,
I was there a lot and um,
I think maybe he saw some enthusiasm while you are obsessed.
Right?
And like you were there daily.
Yeah.
That became much more so when I become a teacher because I saw that,
okay,
I'm filling big shoes here.
You must remember all three of those names that I just mentioned.
All three were world champions.
Okay.
These were good,
good people.
And for that time they were,
they would kill us.
And here I am a phd student.
Now I've got to fill in these shoes.
So I was like,
I've got to get serious about this.
So I made a commitment to,
um,
to becoming the best possible teacher I could.
Now,
you must remember I went in as a teacher.
That was my first assignment.
And so I decided my primary focus in Jujitsu would be upon teaching.
And uh,
uh,
fortunate I came from an academic background.
I had many brilliant,
brilliant professors coming through the philosophy programs both in New Zealand
and the United States.
Um,
Columbia University had fantastic PhD program.
Uh,
so I was very,
uh,
experience and the art of teaching,
but in an academic context.
And I thought maybe this has given me,
faith has given me this angle where I can use an academic approach to teaching
in a sports environment.
And that has really become one of the patents of my approach to teaching a
Jujitsu.
So this is,
uh,
in the 90s and you are a purple belt at the time.
When did you develop this leg lock system that has become so legendary?
So for people,
for the uninitiated that have never heard of you or understand what we're
talking about here.
For the longest time,
Jujitsu was primarily attacks on the arms and the neck.
That was pretty much it.
And there were known attacks on the legs.
But they were frowned upon.
Yes,
something happened you,
you got to see some of those techniques.
In MMA,
you got to see some heel,
occasionally foot locks.
There's a few guys are Lawsky pulled off a a foot lock in the UFC against Tim.
Sylvia has a few guys that were pulling these off.
This is pre who some are Paul Harris,
but you all of a sudden came along with this very effective system that there
was rumblings many years ago about this where a lot of people were talking about
it and a lot of people were saying that,
you know,
John Danaher has this insane leg lock system and then you started developing all
these chat for people don't know the top grapplers in the world.
There's a,
there's a lot of top grapplers in the world.
Jujitsu is incredibly competitive,
but you're recognized as being one of the premiere coaches of the most promising
young people like Gordon Ryan who you're talking about before who is in Abu
Dhabi champion,
Garry Tonin,
Nikki Ryan,
Eddie Cummings.
You have an incredible crew of world class strangle artists who are also known
to be some of the very best leg lockers in the world.
So what happened?
How did that,
how did that all take place?
Um,
let's go through a,
we started about the history of,
Yep.
You've actually asked about six different questions.
Sorry.
It's good,
but we can answer them in turn.
So let's go,
let's go.
The first question,
your first question was a historical question.
How,
how did it happen?
Yeah.
Um,
first off,
um,
there was nothing in my early,
uh,
learnings,
of,
of Jujitsu,
which suggested leg blocks.
Nothing.
Okay.
Um,
hinder would teach by the way she'd say,
my,
my sensei throughout my entire career has been hindered.
Gracie,
um,
I never left up.
He taught me from white belt to black belt and I never left his academy.
I'm the only one of his students who stayed with them from white belt to black
belt and never left.
Um,
uh,
so he ends up with teach legal logs,
but it was taught in always the same fashion that everyone else that here's a
move has a fig of auto whole,
here's a heel hook,
has an achilles lock.
Um,
so the,
the moves themselves when no one,
okay.
They,
they were,
they were in existence.
It wasn't like I invented he hawks or something like that.
That's not the idea.
But they weren't emphasized.
Um,
uh,
very,
very uh,
talented and um,
uh,
influential figure in my life was a guy that I only knew for three days.
Now that sounds,
that sounds crazy,
right?
How can you learn something from someone in three days?
Well,
actually the influence he had occurred in three minutes.
I'm a big believer in the idea that someone can come into your life for a very
short period of time and have a massive influence.
I truly believe that in my case,
it was a great American graphical dean list.
Dean lister was invited by Matt Serra to come to the Henzel Gracie Academy,
I believe,
don't quote me on this,
but I believe dean was a brown butter at the time.
I'm sure it met was a brown,
but at the time too.
And um,
I bought him in for around three days.
Any trained,
mostly with Matt Serra in preparation for a grappling tournament,
if I,
if I remember correctly now.
Dean was one mostly in those days for his Achilles lock.
It later on he would become a heel hook specialists.
But in those days it was mostly an Achilles lock and he came to the academy role
with some people and he did,
he was doing Achilles lungs and getting some success.
Um,
you know,
went both ways.
I mean,
but um,
uh,
he,
he couldn't really get stuff to work on.
Matt Serra,
Matt Serra could get his stuff to work on him,
but um,
uh,
he was doing something which was unusual.
And so I talk with them just briefly after clients.
And I said,
you know,
that's interesting what you're doing with these achilles logs cause I don't
really do that at all.
It's not something I do.
And he said one sentence,
which completely changed my outlook.
He cause why would you ignore 50% of the human body?
One sentence,
why would you ignore 50% of the human body?
And I looked and I was like,
I don't know why,
why would you?
It makes no sense.
And we never talked again.
And then he went back to California.
We don't want to become too,
too time ADCC champion mostly with Laila lungs.
Um,
but what Dean gave me was not technique,
didn't show me a single technique,
but he gave me at point of view as you give a man a point of view,
you can change them.
Okay,
you can,
we can work from there.
That was the influence.
And um,
my Sensei,
Henzel Gracie was at an extremely,
uh,
liberal minded professor of Jujitsu.
He would let us do whatever we wanted.
Okay.
He wasn't one of those guys in know no.
One in my academy studying lake walks.
He was never like that.
He was,
he would allow students to go in any direction they want it provided they could
prove it was effective.
Um,
so I started studying leg locks and that's where I'm going to come to the second
question,
which you asked,
which is why did leg logs have such a bad reputation?
And you did.
So it's curious,
right?
We don't got this way about Alex.
Um,
I'm going to run through the main criticisms and your,
you'll be my witness on this jury.
I'm sure you heard the same criticisms a thousand times.
You would always hear people refer to Lagos in the following way.
The fruit,
the first criticism,
they were too dangerous,
okay?
If you,
if you allow people to do leg walks,
everyone would be injured in a week and units would be impossible.
So that was the first quarter system you would always hear.
The second great criticism is they didn't work.
Okay.
Um,
you might be to tap out a white belt with a heel hook,
but if you are a world championship level,
you never got to tap anybody that didn't work at high levels.
That by itself,
those two criticisms seem to go in opposite directions.
If they're,
if they're really that dangerous but they don't work,
how does that,
how do those two gel?
They are either incredibly dangerous to the point where they can't be practice
or they don't work that they did the two arguments contradict each other.
Then you hear other arguments that they were positionally unsound that if you
were in top position
and you went for a leg lock,
you would lose position.
And that was,
it is Austin.
Okay.
That's a criticism with no merit because it,
Chris St criticism applies to guillotines on bonds,
et cetera.
You can be mounted on someone,
go for an arm,
lock in the loose position,
end of bottom,
but no one criticizes ambos.
Um,
so as I went through the reasons why people criticized leg logging,
none of them really made sense.
So I started asking myself,
well,
often the reasons people give as opposed to what the real reasons are a very
different and the more I thought about it,
the more I thought the real reason people donate.
Leg locks runs much deeper than that.
Let's understand Jujitsu for what it is.
Jujitsu is a systems based approach to fighting,
okay?
What is the system of design Jujitsu?
While it can be described in a few different ways,
I'm going to give you one rendition which is pretty simple and will resonate
with most of your listeners.
Jujitsu is a system based around four distinct steps.
You can add steps,
you can subtract steps,
but the,
the rendition I'm going to give you now is publicly probably the most widely
known.
Okay.
Let's say a friend of yours asked for advice on fighting.
He knows you're a Brazilian Jiu Jitsu expert.
You're a black belt and resigned you to too.
And he said to me,
Joe Rogan,
tell me I didn't know anything.
I want to fight someone else using your procedures.
What are the steps?
It was only just said,
what's the system literate?
Uh,
what is a system that had espouses,
you're going to see always that step number one is take your opponent to the
ground.
Okay.
Why?
What he,
why do you think the ground is so special?
Why did rezone Jess who choose the ground as step number one of it system,
why do you think,
well,
it all came out of judo,
right?
So Brazilian Jiu Jitsu took the effective submission techniques of judo and then
just refine them.
That's these dog,
the reason.
But what's the,
what's the mechanical physical reason?
Because you can control someone on the ground far better,
right?
You can control people.
Loma Chenko con control suite from the standing position with angle and distance
is different ways to control people.
Yes.
In boxing,
if you only are boxing,
but why the ground?
Why did they choose the ground?
What's the mechanical reason?
What happens when you take a human being to the ground?
While there's a whole barrier behind them that you can press them against?
What about if you're in bottom position?
While you could use that barrier as leverage?
True.
But there's something that occurs when someone goes down to the ground.
It's something big that you may be missing here.
What am I missing?
What's the most explosive event and the Olympic Games?
The the event that probably requires more
transfer of energy and development of kinetic energy than any other,
there's a bunch you name,
but one of them for me is always going to be the javelin throw.
The javelin throw involves a full powered sprint,
a jump,
a massive explosive tuning of both hips and shoulders and a throw.
All the quintessential explosive elements of the human body are involved in a
javelin thrower,
probably to a greater degree than any other Olympic event.
And as a result,
people can throw a javelin 80 90 meters.
What would happen if you took those same javelin throwers and made them perform
the same event on the knees?
Wouldn't be so good.
They probably couldn't throw it more than 10 meters.
Okay,
and what's changed the closer they get to the ground,
the list they can employ explosive force.
What's the first thing cowboys do when they go to brand to steer?
Take it down.
Yeah.
They lock up into lakes and they put it down on the ground.
Nobody tries to brand as standing.
Still,
you're going to get killed because it can employ explosive dynamic movement to
hurt you.
You put them on the ground.
Dynamic explosive movement is massively curtailed.
It takes away the single riskiest element of fighting,
which is quick dynamic movement that can generate kinetic energy.
So step number one,
it was going to do it so it was get it to the ground.
It's inherently safer.
Less things can go catastrophic.
We wrong on the ground and in the standing position.
What step number two,
secure.
Dominant position control.
Control,
too vague.
There's many ways to control people.
There's a definite step.
You've just taken the guy down.
What's your first thing and was on a unit,
sir?
Well,
the first thing I would try to do is get to a dominant position.
What do you mean by that?
Be My pass to side control.
Try to match you just sounds it.
It right?
Then get pastas,
legs,
passes legs.
Why legs are strong.
I carry you around.
You could hold a person in position.
They,
they're very good defensively.
They dangerous.
Too dangerous.
Okay.
If I end up inside your legs,
if you're a skilled,
juicy play,
can unlock me.
Can Lake Lock,
we can strangle me.
Even if you were an untrained,
funny,
you could up kick me.
Right.
Mania man has been knocked out by an upkick.
Even an untutored guy conforming up.
Get sure.
Lakes are dangerous.
So step number two is get past those dangerous lakes.
What step number three?
Go for submission.
No,
he must be a 10th planet backbone.
So yeah,
I hate to throw that in some rigid.
Um,
step number three.
Joe,
you're failing on pass.
Okay.
I pass the legs.
Well,
um,
I'm going to try to control,
I'm going to try to either a mount or like I said,
side control.
I'm trying to get you on the right track.
You're trying to work your way through a hierarchy of positions.
Yes.
You got to go to neon belly.
You're going to go side control.
You're going to transition to mount.
You got to transition to rainy,
depending upon
my game.
Yeah.
This is sequence of pins.
Once you get past your opponent's legs and Jujitsu encourages you to go through
those various pins.
If you look at the sport of Jiu Jitsu,
the pins score different amounts of points.
Neon belly scores a certain amount.
Malapposition school is more ram out in schools more.
Why you have a wondering about then why do we score the pins of Jujitsu
differently?
Well,
there's more available from rear mount.
Of course you have,
uh,
you can,
of course you can tack the neck.
You can also attack the arms.
You,
you have a positional advantage where you can't be attacked.
Your,
you're behind them.
So it's one of the most superior positions to achieve.
Very good.
What about the Mount Mount?
When the striking involves phenomenal,
um,
when you just put your finger on it right there,
Joe,
every one of the pins,
if you did soon,
the value of it is measured by your potential to strike your opponent on the
ground.
That's why they score more you on belly scores more.
It's I control because from distance of neon belly,
you can strike with more power.
It's inherently unstable.
However,
so at scores less than mount,
which is inherently more stable and offers the same punching platform.
Step number three of Judas,
who was to work your way through a hierarchy of pins with a pins,
a graded in value according to your ability to strike with effect on the ground.
So far,
so far we've got three elements in this system of Jujitsu.
Step number one,
get to fight down to the ground were explosive.
Kinetic energy is less likely to be valid by a dangerous opponent.
Step number two,
get past this dangerous legs.
Step number three,
work your way through this hierarchy of pins.
The pins are understood in terms of the potential to harm your opponent was
strikes on the floor.
What step number four?
Step number four is try to secure a position where you can submit them.
You've already got the position.
So what state number four attack with a submission,
correct.
So we've just described was zoned unit.
Soon is a four step system.
It's beautiful,
it's elegant,
and it's deadly effective.
Step number one,
take the fight to the ground.
Take away the danger of explosive kinetic energy.
Step number two,
get passes.
Dangerous legs.
Step number three,
work your way through a hierarchy of pins.
Each one graded upon your ability to harm your opponent with strikes on the
ground and set up step number four submissions.
And now the question that needs to be asked with a lake logs put into that
system
and where do they fit in?
They don't.
Traditionally leg walks fit into the system in only one way.
When the system has failed,
when the system's not working and you can't take your opponent down,
you can't pause.
As God,
you can't maintain a dominant position and you can't get the regular submissions
to work.
Fuck it.
Try a leg lock.
Those works was seen lake locks.
We're seeing for generations
as a signal of failure.
When you couldn't get the system to work,
you had to resort to leg logs.
It meant you were a bad Jujitsu player.
You couldn't impose the fundamental system of Jujitsu.
And so you chicken down and you went to leg,
lungs.
That's why they were despised.
Mm.
That was the real reason why for generations,
lake logs were dismissed.
You don't think it was because so many people were injured by them that they
were sort of,
you know,
people get injured.
The worst injuries in Jiu who don't come from submission holds the worst
injuries in Jujitsu.
Jujitsu come from falling body weight.
When people jump God,
when people accidentally poorly performed takedowns.
That's where you see catastrophic injuries.
End Units is we sued career ending injuries,
the joint locks of missions.
You're out for a week,
two weeks,
you know,
catastrophic injuries.
Um,
as I said,
go on Youtube and put in God,
Paul gone wrong.
You'll see catastrophic injuries.
See career ending injuries there.
You're not going to see from Aamaz he'll hogs,
et cetera.
You'll see people getting hurt,
but it's a contact sport you expect then.
Okay.
Um,
no.
There's a,
a very simple elegant system resigned units that we just saw one rendition of
it,
the four step approach.
And you clearly see leg locks don't fit comfortably into that system.
Yeah.
What I did is I tried to find an avenue with I could come in
and the results were surprising.
The first thing is al forced it.
Rendition of you did sue
looked at Jujitsu from top position where we took our opponent down to the
ground and we were on top of them.
But my study of Jujitsu,
he didn't start from top position started from bottom position.
If you look at my students in competition,
you will notice that around 80% of the entries into leg logs come from bottom
position or with their opponent behind them.
In other words,
from what a supposedly inferior positions.
So for me it was never a question of losing position when I went for lake logs
because I was already underneath my opponent.
I started underneath,
how can I end up on bottom by going fairly already on bottom.
So most of my early work in Lagos is how to get into lake hawks from
disadvantageous positions from underneath or when someone is behind me.
So I never have felt this problem of,
okay,
I'm,
I'm going to position if I go for Lake Long.
So I could still play a conventional Jujitsu game and have a very,
very strong leg or can show that was the first avenue of leg locking,
but things became more interesting when I got further into the leg lock game and
I started to realize that as you add lake lungs into the game,
you change the very nature of the sport.
If you look at Jujitsu as it's ordinarily practiced,
it's a single direction game.
If someone is in front of me and I'm standing over them,
do did.
Sue is all about movement from the legs towards the head.
I'm supposed to pass the God worked my way up to chase the chase contact and get
my head next to their head,
either in front of them or behind them,
either mounted or rear mounted.
So jujitsu always goes in one direction.
If you ever get stopped or you lose position,
you just start the process over again.
It's a monodirectional sport.
It always goes from the legs to the head.
Once you start adding leg walks into the game,
Jujitsu become to two directional sport where you can go from the head down to
the legs.
You can go in both directions.
So if I'm passing someone's guard and I somebody can't do it,
I can fall back and go back into the legs.
If I'm site control on someone and they start to recompose the god,
I can fall back into the legs.
I'm going from the upper body down to the lower body.
Traditional Jews who always goes from the lower body directionally up to the
upper body.
So the end up head to head with your opponent.
But once you start adding league logs,
did you just see for the first time becomes a two directional score instead of a
one directional sport.
And you can play your opponent's reactions between the threat of lower body and
upper body in ways it opens up submissions so much more easily than the
traditional game.
So if I take you back to the moment where Dean Lester says to you,
why would you ignore 50% of the human body?
You go back and think about this and what is your next step?
Do you just start looking at students and looking at what you're teaching and
analyzing positions and you're,
you're still rolling at the time.
Correct.
Um,
the first thing that I started to look at is,
okay,
who out there is doing a good job with Blake logging and the owner starts or was
I,
in a lot of people,
what you would see is random success with lake loans.
You'd see a guy wins a match here we got wins a match to their,
um,
uh,
most of the imminent leg lock is of that generation are actually coming out of
Japan.
You'd have people like roominess Sato had a decent,
he'll hook for that time.
I'm an Ra,
I'm an Ra.
That was a little bit preliminary.
The MNR came slightly after roominess or they,
they,
they fought each other and grappling matches.
The covenant one was younger than the other.
Um,
uh,
but,
you know,
they had some success,
I believe even soccer finished Newton with a knee bar.
So the knowledge was there.
Um,
but there was nothing systematic about it.
There was,
there wasn't,
there weren't people who were coming out and just systematically finishing
people with one move.
Okay.
Um,
uh,
so there wasn't much in terms of people to study.
So the first thing I started to asking is,
well,
what is the,
what is the nature of leg lock in what,
um,
if it's,
it seems to have some problems associated with it.
It's not as controlling as the traditional methods of Jujitsu,
that that was the really the keyword they control on Cam.
Why do people favor things that rain naked strangle so much?
Because it's such a controlling position where amount as an incredibly
controlling position.
Why do people favor things like cardiac?
Tommy?
I,
they,
they um,
triangle because this too is a very inherently controlling position.
All the most high percentage,
uh,
finishing holes in engineers who all have control as their dominant feature.
Okay.
It's hot.
People were going to,
as a result,
one person can continue to use the same move the illogic of success,
um,
uh,
over time against the wide array of opponents.
So everything I,
every question I asked ultimately always came back to control and the one thing
you would see with regards to the use of lake logs in the late 1990s and early
two thousands was a lack of control,
so all of my studies and immediately went to the notion of control.
Now there are many forms of leg lock,
but the ones that interest me the most always come out of what the Japanese call
[inaudible] Rami,
Asha Grimes had generic term.
It just means tangled legs.
Okay.
There are many different forms of ashy growing
ashy.
Grameen is a mechanism by which I can use to have my legs to control my
opponents legs and hips.
When I started to do was make a deep study of this notion of Asha Rami.
How am I going to use my legs to control the real estate between my opponent's
knee and his hips?
Preferably on both sides.
Probably the single biggest cliche that you'll hear about Jujitsu is it its
position before submission.
At the time,
I was primary interest in the idea of control before submission control is a
much deeper and wider concept.
Then the basic point structure based positional position for submission model a
of Jiu Jitsu.
There's many ways to control.
People have very little to do with with position.
For example,
ashy Rami itself scores nothing and Jujitsu but done well.
It can control an opponent just as well as rare mount can,
so I started to see that there are many forms of control that went outside of
the traditional basic positional hierarchy resigned you to suit Washi grammy was
one of them.
Probably the single greatest key in the development of my leg lock system.
Again came from a simple realization that the greatest mistake that people have
made in lake log work prior to the arrival of the squad
was it.
They made no distinction between the mechanism of breaking and the mechanism of
control ashy go Rami was the mechanism of control.
The lock itself,
whether it be a heel hook and Achilles lock,
a figure for toe hold.
That was the mechanism of braking.
If you watch 99% of the people out there who claim to be experts in leg locking,
they don't distinguish between the two.
They see,
for example,
he'll hooking as a single skill.
There's the lock on the legs,
the ashy grammy or whatever term they use for it,
and the lock itself,
they're not distinguished.
They taught it a single skill.
You can't differentiate the ashy grammy and the lock and you'll see people
teaching in this manner.
What I did was to destroy only distinguished between the two so that my students
could all hold an [inaudible] position and switched from one.
Now she grabbed me to another and hope people for extended periods of time and
inhibit movement.
If I can inhibit movement for long periods of time,
I can break you at will.
I can take my time when I come to break you because the control is there.
The control is prime.
To break a second,
the most people is just trolling the ashy Grameen immediately go for the law.
They don't even have so much.
The ashy grammy is described as part of the heel hook.
They don't distinguish between the two.
Once I made that realization in the early two thousands,
that's when the ball started rolling.
That's when,
um,
uh,
a significant amount of progress was made.
Um,
I would say that you'll question was an interesting one.
Okay.
You had the inside list,
they gave you the insight.
What was the,
what started you going for it was the making first a critical distinction
between control and submission and the case of leg logging between the mechanism
of control or she go Rami and the mechanism of breaking,
which is the lock itself,
in my case,
the he hug.
Oh really good example of this is how effective it's been implemented by your
students against real world class presenters,
Jiu Jitsu and competitors who don't use these methods like a good one is Gordon
Ryan versus Cyborg Cyborg who is a fucking beast of a man and just a physical
specimen.
A real freak and is known for his Tornado Guard is,
you know,
is no stranger to leg locks,
is no stranger to any of the positions of Nogi or gay Jujitsu.
But when I watched Gordon wrap him up and control him and before he got the
submission,
you could see Cyborg look befuddled.
Yeah.
He loses the match was over roughly 30 seconds before the submission was
applied.
Yeah.
He was just trying to figure out a way out of it and just was nowhere to go.
Is it terrifying position to be in for a real world class Brazilian Jiu Jitsu
black belt like Cyborg when you watch that,
that match.
I was like,
this is stunning because Gordon is what,
21 years,
which is amazing and Cyborgs in his thirties.
Right.
I think Cyborg has been a blight belt many,
many years longer than Gordon is even being doing Jujitsu.
Yeah.
He's one of the best guys in the world.
And when you,
you look at how well Gordon Dismantle Tim on the ground using the strategy that
you just described it,
just see if we could find that.
Actually see if he can find Gordon Ryan versus uh,
his,
his actual name is,
I believe you pronounce it a brew.
How do you do cardio approved?
He caught,
oh,
Cybil upper.
Yeah,
just a lot of cyborgs in the Jujitsu world.
There's a male Cyborg and MMA.
There's a female Cyborg,
I think Cyborg and pitfalls.
So we're watching it here now.
And you see Cyborg who's this fucking tank of a man and Gordon Ryan was quite a
physical specimen himself,
but much younger guy.
It hasn't.
How long has John Gordon Been Doing Jujitsu?
I believe it's between six and a half and seven years total now.
That's fucking crazy.
And,
and immediately he dives under,
gets low
using butterfly guard
and so his,
what he's trying to do,
um,
Gordon is trying to do what with Cyborg his legs.
Uh,
the first thing that Gordon Ryan needs to do is establish inside position with
his feet.
If you,
uh,
probably the single biggest uh,
starting point for any kind of Asha Rami based game.
If you want to remember anything about this,
Joe,
remember this,
whenever you go into lake lungs,
the person whose feet dominate the inside position will always dominate the ashy
go rami game.
That's the heuristic that I teach all of my students called and Ryan has just
established inside position,
right?
We're just pulled him in,
which is interesting.
Cyborg literally pulled him in with his feet inside.
You have a Gordon's feet.
We're positioned in a way where they could own me end up in,
in the inside position.
So that's the first thing he's got to establish inside position with the feet.
He knows damn well if his feet occupied the inside position,
wherever they go,
he's going to get to the,
uh,
the ashy grammy and his opponent.
What about a stop now?
Can we freeze it there?
Pass.
Okay.
Uh,
actually can you go back a little bit with,
uh,
with overshot to sell at all?
Okay.
Right about here again,
initially there's a battle going on here for inside foot position.
Cyborg is an extremely well trained and opponent
and he's doing a good job of trying to backstage with his left leg.
He knows that if he keeps both of us feet on the lefthand side of Gordon Ryan's
body,
he will be able to prevent his opponent getting inside position.
So he's doing the right thing.
He's,
he's doing a good job.
He had cyborgs,
not naive.
He's,
as you said before,
he's a multi time world champion.
He's very,
very good.
He's not lake locking someone who doesn't understand what's going on.
He knows what Gordon Ryan wants.
Uh,
there's a battle here for inside foot position.
Cyborg is doing the right thing.
He's going into a back step.
He's going to post his right hand on the floor and try and backstep out.
Let's go just a little further forward into the video.
Got Freeze.
I go back just a fraction.
Just a little more.
Okay.
What is Gordon's right,
right foot have
uh,
his,
his right foot.
It looks like it's hard to see here,
but it looks like he's got,
he's got inside position with one foot.
He's got inside position with one foot.
The whole question is what's going to happen with cyborgs left leg.
Now we've got a battle between Gordon Ryans,
left leg and cyborgs.
Left leg.
Okay.
How the battle goes from here,
we'll come down to one thing.
Who Wins that battle?
Okay,
go forward.
Just a little more hook.
Slump right away.
Okay.
Cold Ryan just won the battle.
Essentially at this point,
the fight is over.
The only question is how long is it going to take?
Why am I so confident?
Am I,
am I an asshole?
Am I saying this because I'm an asshole?
No,
I'm saying because I know what's happening.
I gave you one of the keynotes of the leg walking game already.
I'll say it again because it's so important.
The man whose feet dominate the inside position will always dominate the ashy
grammy game.
Now the second,
whenever you go to a tech,
someone's leg,
90% of the resistance on the leg you're attacking comes from the other leg.
It's so important.
I'm going to say it to you again.
Whenever I go to a tech,
my opponent's right leg,
90% of the resistance is going to come from his left leg.
We talked about control,
the foundational principle of control and leg logging.
As a principal,
I referred to as double trouble,
double trouble as a simple idea that if I control both of my opponent's legs,
he does no longer has the opportunity as sick and lake to defend the first,
so the amount of trouble that you've put them in is literally doubled in a
matter of seconds.
Gordon Ryan has a hold of Cyborgs,
right leg with his left arm,
and he has a,
a hold of cyborgs left leg with his legs.
Why was I so confident that the match is over at this point?
Because both of cyborgs legs are now controlled by Gordon Ryan.
He is just attained double trouble.
Now let's slowly advance the video.
Do you see how cyborgs legs are in a straight line?
He's having a very,
very hard time holding his base.
Is The con stop?
Can you go back just a fraction
right about here?
Freeze.
Okay.
Al whole approach to Jitsu was based around the idea of putting wages around our
opponent's body so that we can inhibit movement,
uh,
which functions just as,
um,
a door stopper stops the door from moving in a breeze on Cam.
The only thing better than a wage as a reinforced wage,
that's where the wage is locked in place by another part of your body.
Gordon Ryan currently has inside position with the right leg.
He has control of Cyborgs,
other leg with his arm.
So both legs have some degree of control,
but he's about to massively reinforced that control by locking a triangle or a
Sankaku around his opponent's leg.
In order for that to happen,
he's going to have to lift his hips slightly off the floor so that he can
elevate over cyborgs.
Left knee,
watch the video.
There's the elevation,
there's the lock.
Freeze,
freeze.
Now he's got cyborgs.
Two lakes in a straight line.
That means cyborgs.
Only mechanism of posting or saving his balances,
his left arm.
That's all these got left at this point.
The fight is done.
Cyborgs right leg is controlled by Golden Ryan's left arm.
Cyborgs.
Left leg is controlled by a reinforced wage to strength of both Gordon rines
legs locked up in a triangle.
Cyborgs actually a weight division heavier,
I believe then Gordon,
but it doesn't matter at this point.
Both hips a controlled.
This is a full state of double trouble.
Both legs controlled and a breaking mechanism in place is an asha grammy on the
lake.
You can break someone from Dan.
Cyborg knows his only method of not being finished is to keep his hips over.
Gordon Ryan's house.
So the next battle is how has Gordon Ryan going to put sidewalks,
hips on the ground?
What's saving Cyborg is his left hand.
Let's see how the battle goes.
The battle just got lost.
The hips went down.
Why was it so easy?
Stop.
I don't know.
Tell me.
Do you see that right knee?
Yes.
That's what pushed him over.
The right knee went into the pocket of cyborgs.
Left hip.
That made a directionality of force,
was slightly away from the one base of support that Cyborg had left,
which was his left hand.
So he got sat on his hips.
Now go forward.
Just a little
and freeze.
What do you see,
Joe?
In what way?
What do you,
what do you want me to look up?
What do you see?
Both legs are wrapped up but be more precise?
Uh,
well he has incredible control with his right leg.
Um,
the way he's got his right leg and his left leg triangled he's got the cyborgs
right foot talk deep under his arm and he also has the left foot in there as
well.
So he's completely wrapped up with his legs and his arms.
Very good.
Okay.
Let's bring in a few points here.
First,
if you want to immobilize a human being and preventing it from moving,
and what are the best things you can ever do is lock their legs together.
You get a dangerous prisoner.
What's the first thing you do?
Handcuff his feet together and handcuff.
Cup his hands together and he's no longer dangerous.
Okay.
He has Cyborg,
one of the most dangerous Judas who plays in the world,
but with the two of his feet slunk together,
he's,
he's effectively neutralized oncom pants.
Most importantly,
we've got a very interesting distinction here between what we call a primary and
a secondary leg.
Which leg is the Asha Rami locked up on?
Well,
he's got the left leg is was triangle.
That's the,
yeah,
she rummy lake.
We call that the primary leg.
The ashy go Rami has locked on cyborgs.
Left leg.
That's the primary leg.
The other leg,
remember our principal for 90% of all resistance comes from the second leg.
The arm controls the secondary leg and the legs control the primary leg.
So the resistance from the secondary leg is pushing off and trying to separate
the lock.
This numerous things he could pummeled with foot.
He could put his foot on the floor and turn.
You could invert his body.
There's a thousand things he could do,
but he's not doing any of them.
If you control that leg.
Betsy,
important theme.
So golden boy Golden.
Ryan's up the body.
His left arm controls the secondary leg and his lower body,
the ashy grammy controls the primary leg as a result.
What do you think of cyborgs?
Ability to move.
He's fucked.
He's completely nullified.
Yeah.
Okay.
Let's go a little further.
Freeze.
Now cyborg is doing.
All he can do.
Movement has been taken away from him,
so his only option is to fight the hands.
Gordon Ryan understands that he has control of the secondary leg,
but he needs to make a transition to the primary leg.
In order to break Cyborg,
he's going to have to release the secondary leg.
Now that's a,
that's a scary thing.
If you release a secondary leg,
then your opponent Cosat to Findian himself again.
So he's got a measure.
How he releases the secondary leg.
So it is a battle for angle here.
Cyborg is battling for the hands,
but Gordon Ryan hasn't even started the hand flight yet.
He still in the control.
Fine.
His only interest is in holding the position.
Go a little further.
Freeze.
Why did golden switch his right hand to the knee?
Well,
that's the leg that can control,
or a secondary late secondary leg,
which can defend.
Um,
I would imagine he's distracting him.
Why his Golden Ryan's head leaning to the right hand side?
I'm not.
Why?
Because that society needs to take some Cybil.
If cyborg turns his head to the other side.
When Gordon Ryan releases the secondary leg,
he's going to be a problem
is a battle for angle.
Now that no one sees
Gordon Ryan's head tells the whole story here.
Let's go a little further.
Freeze board.
Ryan is already beginning to transition to the primary leg.
It's a way he's got it locked up.
It's just so horrific to yes,
the two of them crossed over each other.
Now at some point he's got uncross the legs to get to the primary leg.
Let's go a little further.
Cyborg still engage in the hand fight.
Now golden is about to make his transition to the hand fight.
Okay,
freeze.
Gordon Ryan's made the critical release of the secondary leg.
This is where things start to get interesting.
Cyborg has perhaps tragically sat on his right hip,
which means he has no ability to use his secondary leg to escape,
and because he's holding Gordon Ryan's arm,
he has no ability now to invert his body and go into a attorney and escape.
Now Gordon Reinders needs to release the right arm.
Let's go further.
Freeze.
Go back just to here.
Okay.
Gordon Ryan is about to release a secondary leg freeze right there.
Now very slowly.
Take it forward.
Watch Gordon Ryan's left elbow freeze.
Why did he put the elbow there?
I Dunno.
It's a wage.
It's a mobilizing the leg he really wants to attack.
He switched his arm position from controlling the secondary leg,
which he hasn't yet fully,
but he's put his elbow in front of the toes of the primary leg to keep that
primary life from extending.
Correct and to be able to transition effortlessly.
Enter the lock or he needs now is to release the right arm.
Cyborg knows if he loses the right arm.
The fight is lost.
Continuing Gordon goes back to our position.
Freeze,
freeze.
Go back just to here.
Why did Gordon Ryan,
when the hand fight battle
freeze gold Cyborg is one of the strongest people in Jujitsu.
He's got two hands on a guy in a weight division lower than him.
Why can't he hold,
why did he lose the arm?
Why Watch Gordon Ryan's right elbow?
What did you say?
Sent,
let me say that again.
He's just lifting it up and pulling it away.
What is he doing?
He changed the angle through the elbow.
There's a grip over and a grip under.
If you just pull,
you'll never release the arm.
Right?
He changed the elbow position so that one grip was lost and then a push poll
with the elbow and a slip
once,
continue forward.
Now
he's got the left arm set.
As soon as the hands touch and sidebar just taps before he even gets a chance to
extend it because he knows the games lost.
Uh,
he knew the game was last long before then.
That's pretty odd.
Damn impressive.
Mm.
Yes.
And yet you'll see this with almost all of my students.
I have seen that with all your students,
which is so bizarre now how many people are recognizing this system and trying
to mimic it or trying to find out some sort of a counter attack to it?
Um,
that's an interesting question.
I'm a,
I'm told is actually kind of like an industry of people who try to break what we
do down and mimic it.
Um,
I know there's people putting out numerous instructionals they've,
they've watched what the squad does and tries to,
to,
to break it down.
Um,
that's,
that's good.
And it's natural.
I,
I'd be doing the same thing if someone else was coming out and we're making
people where they've given me a lot studying what they're doing to.
Um,
so yeah,
there,
there does seem to be an industry of that.
Um,
the question is how successful I think.
Do you see any other groups of people coming out and just exclusively clinician
people with the same moves?
Time and time again,
years at a time at
all levels of competition.
No,
you're,
you're seeing more 10th planet guys do that now.
10th Planet guys have,
um,
and giving you all the credit in the world by the way that they've,
started transitioning to a lot more leg lock attacks,
leg lock defense
trading on that.
Yeah.
It's um,
uh,
what we find is most people definitely struggle with defending it and um,
you know,
this has been around for quite a while now.
It's been five years since the score really started pushing this publicly and
um,
uh,
it seems that there's still going to be some,
eventually people will figure things out.
It's just the way she progress works.
But,
um,
uh,
I think at this point it's pretty clear that people have changed their minds
about lego walks.
People I think are recognizing that there's something different going on here,
that this is a control based approach to leg locks rather than a,
you know,
a speed and power boast,
a approach to leg logs and,
um,
uh,
the evidence for its success really comes from the nature of the squad itself.
If you look at the three founding members of the squat,
Eddie Cummins,
Gordon,
Ryan and Gary Thompson,
all three have very,
very different body types.
All three have very,
very different personalities and yet all three use a very similar game.
Um,
two of those three athletes came from nowhere.
They had no competition record before they started training.
Uh,
with me at the hands of Gracie Academy.
One of them had a competition record.
He was a,
I believe Gary [inaudible] was a brown belt,
a competitor in the ghee and,
but he had no legal game.
He was a guy who was essentially no one forced scrambling from bottom half guard
and using Randwick naked strangles and out of scrambles,
um,
strangles out of scrambles.
My God,
then we would have such a tongue twister.
Um,
uh,
so Gary,
Tom was a particularly interesting case because he came to me is an already
developed athlete and he's trained under a very good friend of mine,
Tom to blast,
um,
and completely changed his game.
So that showed something very interesting that showed that someone could already
have a developed game and then take on this and change their games.
That was a particularly interesting case with the case of Eddie Cummings and
Gordon Ryan.
They came to me early in their development.
So they,
they,
um,
they took it on wholesale as it were.
I think this style and approach and one of the things that's so fascinating
about it is it really requires someone like you to systematically break it down
the way you have it described it.
Um,
I've done Jujitsu for 20 years,
but I never stopped and thought of all the positions in the system,
all the steps in the system,
take the fight to the ground,
can't pass the dangerous legs,
you know,
uh,
achieve some sort of a dominant position and go for the submission.
I didn't do that.
I knew,
I knew what was,
what I find with most unit supplies is they know what they're doing on an
unconscious level.
Yes.
My job
as a coach is to make it conscious.
Okay.
Um,
now for me,
the most interesting thing when I,
when I first had to think about Jujitsu is a system.
Okay.
I did that when I wrote a book for my,
for my Sensei Henzel Gracie.
Um,
he asked me to write a book and I started thinking deeply about,
you know,
what is this thing that I study?
I spend all day on the man's,
what am I doing exactly.
And um,
when you start consciously thinking about it,
okay,
breaking it down to steps you see presented gets was a step by step system.
My question was,
can I go further than that?
If you did,
sue was a simple single system.
What about if he divided Jujitsu up into niche areas and instead of having one
overall system,
you had an overall system with many subsystems within it.
So he had a leg system,
a bag system,
the front headlocks system,
a Kimora system.
My approach that you did,
sue,
is it,
I had recognized it much of the success of early procedures who came from it's
systematic nature of the fact that it was a systems based approach to Jujitsu.
And I took
various niche areas and created systems within systems.
Then things started getting interested in when I started integrating the system
so that one subsystem failed.
You could transfer to another.
That meant that my students could put opponents who were trained much,
much longer than they had into a niche area,
which my students had so much knowledge of.
So much training in that isolated niche domain to take could take someone who
had trained three,
four times,
longs in themselves and have more knowledge in that one domain.
Then they're much more experienced opponent did,
and so what you saw with the squad was incredibly speedy progress.
Whether we're getting wins against people who are trained to three times longer
than they had,
and this idea of what I call integrated subsystems instead of having Jujitsu was
just one simple single system.
You keep the overall system of Jujitsu,
but you have subsistence within it.
Each one integrated with the other,
so that one's one system fails,
you can pass off to another and it goes back and forth until you get the win.
That was my approach to Jujitsu.
That's one I want to do as him if I can innovate.
You did.
So in any given direction,
that's probably the one I would push the most.
Now throughout this time,
your dealing with some pretty significant injuries and physical limitations that
you've had.
Um,
tell me about those,
what those were and what and how those hindered.
Yeah.
Um,
uh,
when I was in my early teens,
I was involved in a,
um,
a rugby injury where my,
my knee was massively injured.
Um,
over the next,
uh,
six years.
Uh,
I would dislocate my knee ligaments appear to be,
um,
severely compromised every six months or so I get a fresh,
which would be
severe or not be on crutches.
I spent a significant amount of my teenage years on crutches,
um,
around the age of 19.
I had one last injury and,
uh,
my knee just seem to have no power and it seems like,
I walk with a limp and,
um,
you must remember this is in the 1980s in New Zealand and this is pre Mris,
preauthorize scopic surgery.
The doctors said,
well,
we can do an operation where we shortened the ligaments so there's less
looseness in there and hopefully you'll Neil be strong again.
I'm an operation was performed and uh,
unfortunately the ligaments we'll cut too short.
And as a result,
my,
my leg never straightened again.
Um,
I developed a severe case of arthrofibrosis we might need actually became
deformed and doesn't straighten.
Um,
simple actions like walking,
kneeling are extremely painful for me and have been my whole life.
I'm just walking around.
Just walking is painful.
A neediness,
extremely painful.
And um,
you know,
it's not easy to do.
Just say we did.
There's a lot of kneeling.
And,
uh,
also there were other kind of structural problems as they got older because I
walk with a limp and one leg significantly bent and one straight.
Uh,
I tend to be completely out of balance,
out of sync with my body.
So I soon developed a considerable hip and back pain.
Um,
so this was something I carried with me my whole life.
And,
um,
uh,
when I started unit two at the age of 28,
there was a,
there was a concern,
you know,
am I going to have to do this?
Well,
fortunately,
ground grappling as a rule is generally easier on your body.
Then standing martial arts,
it is a,
I don't think,
for example,
with my leg,
I could even become moderately effective at [inaudible].
Taekwondo is something we have to get a jump and land.
I just couldn't do it.
Um,
whereas a Jujitsu,
because it's on the ground,
you can,
you can become pretty good.
Um,
so I battled through that and uh,
I'm,
I developed a,
a satisfactory degree of competence.
Uh,
uh,
I got up light bulb from Henzel Gracie and I became one of his main teachers.
So how would you train with such a compromised knee?
Ah,
you just figured out a way around it.
You just,
you know,
what are you going to do that you never thought,
well boy,
I fucked my knee up.
I don't want to fuck my other knee up to,
you know,
I think at that point you,
you just got to go forward and you've got a choice.
You got to sit down and feel sorry for yourself,
where you're going to do the best you can with what you've gone.
And how limited was your game because your knee,
I mean,
were you able to,
standing position was difficult for me,
but will you ever do triangles and all sorts of different,
I mean,
I had,
you know,
every week or so I would tweak it and I'd be in pain for a day.
I developed,
um,
a strong for Ibuprofen throughout my life.
Um,
and uh,
other problems started to emerge.
You speech to the lower back,
lower back is a big issue and gave me problems.
My whole animal.
Listo now I have a machine I have to show you.
Okay.
That's a called the reverse hyper.
Have you ever heard of it?
Oh yes.
Um,
I believe they were used by a guy called Louis Simmons.
Tom?
Yes.
Uh,
yeah.
Yeah.
I can't use one now because they have a hip replacement.
And when you go up,
it puts extreme shearing force on a hip replacement.
So I can do it with body weight,
but I can't do it with a weight.
So,
um,
uh,
I'm aware of what they are.
They,
I know many people speak very highly of them,
but I'm so yeah,
I had this problem and,
uh,
things didn't really become critical until my mid to early forties.
When,
as a result of walking my whole life with a limp,
my left hip started to become completely bone on bone.
So then the problem's doubled because now I had a completely screwed up knee and
a hip,
but I couldn't get any kind of operations because George St Pierre was fighting.
Chris Weidman was fighting.
They both had great goals.
And I,
I,
so I delayed the,
uh,
the hip operation as long as they could until George had his first retirement
and Chris Weidman,
what became a world champion and then moved further away to long island.
It wasn't training with me so much.
Um,
at that time I,
uh,
I started training the squad and,
um,
uh,
my first,
active competitive grappling student was 80 Cummings and,
um,
uh,
I was able to work effectively with him as best I could with my hip problems.
Uh,
and of course the original lake problem.
Um,
and,
uh,
then at some point I,
it got to a point where literally if I walked down in New York City block,
I would have to stop several times and just stand on the side of the road and
wait for my hip to stop hurting so I could walk in.
It just became impossible to work with.
And I ended up getting a,
a,
a full hip replacement and that's when they shear off the top of your head.
Yeah.
These bolt down in there with a new hip and that's correct.
And how does it feel now?
Um,
it's pain free,
which is a wonderful thing for me.
Um,
like any,
uh,
fake Hep is never going to be as strong as your real hip.
This limitations on what I can do there.
The only problem was that shortly after the hip replacement went and then my
knee finally collapsed after 30 years of of problems.
And so I'm going to have to get a knee replacement on the same leg.
Yeah.
And how do they do that?
One?
A knee replacements a little bit tricky because you don't get as much bone mass
to work with.
And um,
general generally the longevity of knee replacements is not as,
uh,
cause there's much more movement in the need.
And there,
there wasn't a hip,
there's much greater range of motion.
Um,
and there's less bone to affects two.
They generally don't have the longevity of a,
a hip replacement.
Um,
so,
uh,
I'm,
I'm 50 years old,
so ideally you would want a replacement that outlived you,
but I would probably have to get a second knee replacement when I get older to
replace the first,
which is not ideal,
but I probably gonna have to do it.
Well,
who knows what kind of crazy technology they'll have down the line.
I hope so.
I have to give me some kind of superhero leg that turns things around for me.
Yeah.
Well,
you never know.
I mean,
it's just the,
the nature of the hip replacement is so it's so brutally invasive.
Uh,
the sheering off the top of the hip and then the rod that's inserted deep into
the bone of the hip and then all that jazz.
Yeah,
it's a lot.
It's a lot going on there.
So,
um,
it to,
to answer your question,
uh,
in the early days it was a,
it was an impediment that I worked around.
Um,
but as I got older,
um,
I hit to,
uh,
do a first operation and now a second bullet.
Believe it or not,
Joe,
I was actually scheduled to get my knee replacement tomorrow.
Um,
but I didn't do it because Gary Tony is going to be fighting his first MMA fight
and much 26?
No.
Is He fighting for one FC One FC?
So I,
if I got the knee replacement now,
I would not be able to help them get ready for his first MMA fine,
which I thought would be,
um,
uh,
there's not fear on my part in it,
you know?
And,
uh,
so I delayed it until after that fight.
Why did he decide on one MC?
That's interesting question.
You'd have to ask.
Gary taught him to be certain.
Um,
uh,
but he,
I think one of his main fears was that if he went through the amateur route and
then worked his way towards the UFC,
there would be problems because he's already an established name in grappling.
And I think he was concerned that it would be difficult for them to get people
to fight amateur,
um,
and uh,
and then eventually make its way to the UFC.
Whereas one FC as a fairly well known organization and they were pretty open.
They,
he did a grappling match for them and they loved it and were like,
you know,
are you interested in MMA?
And so he could,
uh,
as it were,
um,
go into a,
a fairly high level of MMA right from the start as opposed to do a long
Securitas amateur route and then battle his way into the UFC.
I believe,
don't quote me on this,
but I believe that was the logic behind it.
Hmm.
Now are you a book?
So when you're demonstrating techniques,
so you're demonstrating them verbally
after the hip replacement.
I could only do it verbally and I had to trust and uh,
my,
my students,
80 Cummings,
Gary,
Tom and Gordon,
Ryan and others.
Brian Gluck isn't,
no one knows him,
but he's one of my,
uh,
great students.
Um,
I would,
uh,
point with a stick and uh,
they would do the most for me.
Um,
since then I've gotten a little better and I like to demonstrate as best can
this days when I,
I can barely walk and on those days I'll have the students go through.
Sometimes there's certain standing techniques that I had a little risky for me
to do and I'll have students demonstrate those.
But,
um,
uh,
I,
I do what I can on the days that I teach.
It is quite fascinating that a guy who was catastrophic injuries of his leg is
one who was known for being an innovator and crushing people's lives.
There is something kind of a strange about that.
Yeah.
You were joking around about it being revenge.
This is missing my revenge against the world.
If God took away my leg,
I'm taking away everybody else's.
Um,
and so,
um,
yeah,
there,
there was something ironic about them.
Now when your teaching this system and um,
you,
you're showing all the guys in the squad,
the Donna,
her death squad,
do you have,
um,
like do you have it worked out to the point where it's like you have a
curriculum?
Like do you have like I never liked the word curriculum because that kind of
implies that it's all right,
worked out in advance and you know,
it's done step by step.
Um,
I come in on any given day and I'm,
I'm there seven days a week.
I watch all of my athletes every single day.
They didn't do anything without me watching them do it.
So I know at the end of every day what they need to work on tomorrow because I'm
there.
So it's not like a set curriculum early,
you know,
I know that on April 13 I'm going to do this and it's not like that.
It's like I saw you train yesterday,
I saw where you fucked up and I saw where you were.
Good.
So tomorrow we're working this
what an amazing resource for those guys to have some like you standing over
them,
watching them and analyzing their positions and techniques and progress.
That's um,
that's generous of you to say.
Um,
but I always feel that my students are more of a resource to me than I am to
them.
I've been blessed through my entire coaching career to have some truly
remarkable students,
some of whom are famous and known to you and many others who aren't.
And,
um,
uh,
whatever debt they out to me,
I feel I owe at least as much to them.
Um,
my students literally give me everything.
I'm,
I'm a notoriously difficult person to get along with him,
demanding I'm,
I'm a perfectionist.
I'm,
I can be downright unpleasant when my body's in pain,
I'm short tempered.
Um,
and yet they're like angels.
They based stick in there and they tough it out and they,
they give so much time,
so much effort,
so much thought.
And as I said,
whatever resource I am to them,
they,
they give it right back.
There are a resource to me.
Well that,
that attitude is why you're such a fantastic coach in the first place.
I remember one of the first times I've started talking to you is when you were
working with George.
Now what's interesting is you had a very interesting approach and even the way
you describe things you would talk about shoot boxing.
Hmm.
Describe that because you,
you didn't talk when like I remember,
uh,
I think one of our first long conversations with at some weird Denny's or
something somewhere and one of those weird road shows like will it just sat down
with you,
right.
That was the first that we made were we had a long conversation and um,
you were talking about the principles of shoot boxing.
Please explain.
Um,
one of the strange things about the sport of mixed martial arts is so young that
there's still so much to be done.
Okay.
Even the way people understand mixed martial arts to me is interesting.
99% of people who look at mixed martial arts see mixed martial arts as an
eclectic sport.
In other words,
it's a conglomeration of different martial arts kind of banded together.
And then you've got mixed martial arts.
It's a mix of martial arts and there you have it.
You get two guys in the cage.
What mixed martial arts,
I never saw mixed martial arts as an eclectic sport.
I see it as a transcendent sport.
What I mean by that is there are four distinct skill areas of mixed martial
arts.
Any one of those skill areas always goes beyond the component martial arts that
make it up.
In other words,
the skill area Kranz sins,
the various martial arts that make it up and create something bigger and
different from the core components that originally built it.
When you look at the sport of mixed martial arts,
you see there are four dominant skill areas.
The first occurs when they first come out and the two athletes who have no
connection with each other and they're dancing around the cage.
This is the so called shoot boxing phase,
which involves skills drawn from western boxing,
Muay Thai karate,
a freestyle wrestling and various other martial arts where the two athletes are
jocking for position and typically they trying to determine the direction of the
fight.
Will it go down or will it stay up?
That's one skill area.
The second skill area as a scholar of the clinch with a two athletes are both
still standing,
but now they've got a hold on each other.
They no longer moving around.
It will,
this has its key components come drawn from Moitai,
Greco,
Roman wrestling,
freestyle wrestling,
judo,
et Cetera,
et cetera.
Then there's a third key skill area.
The area of fence fighting fence.
Boxing with a two athletes are in a clinch,
but they're locked on the fence,
which dramatically changes the skills required for success than if you're in the
open.
And then you have a fourth skill area,
which is the ground.
And of course that's divided into top and bottom position.
So there are four skill areas of mixed martial arts.
You could add more or less.
Uh,
for example,
you could add in the idea of the geography of the cage can add a new areas,
but let's stick with that fundamental four for now.
If you show me any one of those skill areas,
yes,
you can derive skills from those component martial arts,
from Moitai,
from judo,
whatever you choose,
but that skill here is going to have other elements that are not part of those
original martial arts that is something different,
something unique and something above the various component martial arts that
made it up
when you're fighting on the ground.
A lot of what you do is the ride from Brazilian Jujitsu and modern mixed martial
arts.
Most of the athletes come from a Jiu Jitsu background.
When they work ground skills they they work on in a kind of a Jujitsu framework,
but many of the things going on down,
there are a mix of things that have far outside of your daily training and
beside units you can bring in things from Moitai you're throwing Moitai.
Al was on the ground,
but on the ground the,
I was have a very different feel from the standing position.
They've,
a mechanics behind them is significantly different.
You're throwing hooks on the ground.
But the mechanics of soy and hooks on the ground have very,
very different from the mechanics of throwing hooks in the standing position.
So yeah,
you're,
you're bringing skills in from box,
but you're adapting them to welcome.
So the way to look at the sport of mixed martial arts is not just like,
okay,
I'm going to rope together some race lanes and boxing and see what happens.
Rather you're developing skills in four distinct areas,
a minimum of four,
and the skills you ultimately develop go beyond.
And I'd significantly different from the core components that you started with.
And so ultimately the skills of a mixed martial artist at the highest levels
transcend the various corps martial arts that made the sport up.
You're going to something,
you're going further when you fight in a mixed martial arts fight.
[inaudible] a huge in a lot more than just you did sue and the various other
boxing styles,
et Cetera,
that you used.
In the case of shute box and,
and George Saint Pierre,
everyone always talks about George's wrestling.
Now George is a very good wrestler.
He's wrestler a long time with very good people,
but 90% of the success of his ability to take people down
goes far beyond wrestling and has to do with the precursors to the shot.
What wrestling teachers he drew and mixed martial arts is how to a shot.
It gives you the body mechanics to finish the shot,
but the sit ups I completely different from wrestling.
I can show you endless examples of good wrestlers who went into mixed martial
arts competition with no background in mixed martial arts and couldn't take
anybody down.
That distance is different.
The standards,
different emotion is different.
The set ups are completely different.
The context is different.
You've been punched and sort of grappling.
Okay.
George,
in my opinion throughout his career had a level of skill and technical insight
and neat the art of boxing kickboxing and to take downs that no one else has
even come close to.
Much of what he did in that area came from himself.
Did he have good wrestling coaches?
Absolutely.
Did he have good boxing coaches?
Great.
Moitai coaches 100%
but the skills he was exhibiting went beyond any one of those teachers or even
them as a whole.
The act of tying together all of those disparate skills came from him.
The integration of skills.
And so you have someone who had a wrestling background,
had a boxing background,
had a Moitai background,
but ultimately what he was doing was something bigger than all of those put
together.
There's a sign of just to get fit here with the,
is it the sum was,
was somehow greater than the components that,
uh,
individually made it up.
And that's what I mean when I talk about trends in that support.
Um,
George St Pierre was largely responsible through individual experimentation,
starting his late teens and going through his entire career in the development
of shoot box.
Now when you work as a coach for George,
you weren't just working as a Jujitsu coach,
you were working in almost like a mastermind sort of a position.
You,
I mean,
I saw some conversations that you had with him where you discussed various
things.
And in fact,
one of the things you came to me about was you asked me if I knew anyone who was
proficient at the spinning back kick and that's how I got to working with
George,
your Ph,
your,
your coaching with him was not just simply like these are the principles of
Jujitsu.
This is what I want you to work on.
When the fight goes to the ground.
You were working on a lot of different aspects.
Like you are a guy that sort of put it together.
Now when you don't have a background in striking and you know,
you are you looking at all of these various disciplines and trying to formulate
a strategy for a guy who was just such a supreme athlete.
George,
how did you,
how did you formulate that?
Did you do it based on the individual and based on their physical strengths and
limitations and sort of formulate what you think could be the best approach?
Did you work it out with him in conjunction?
Um,
the,
when,
when George comes to train with me this,
there's a bunch of considerations.
First of all,
George lives in Montreal.
I live in New York.
So time is always an issue.
Well he does go down there because then they quite often,
but um,
uh,
but it's not like a squat.
The squat say like seven days a week,
three times a day.
George was never like that.
Um,
uh,
so in the time available we'll work on uh,
on,
on what we can.
So everything is always done with Georgia.
Okay.
How much time is available and what is the scenario that's coming up for George?
Almost always.
That was,
um,
uh,
an upcoming mixed martial arts fight.
Okay.
Um,
so a lot of people often ask me to say,
you know,
how can we didn't teach,
teach George Saint Pierre League logs?
What,
why wasn't he leg lock and everyone in MMA?
Um,
well it's,
it's a good question.
Uh,
first off,
um,
leg logging as you saw from the Gordon Ryan Clip requires,
if it's not done well,
leg lock in is one of those things where if it's done well,
it's amazing.
But if it's done badly,
it's the worst looking thing in the world and a disaster.
Um,
so,
uh,
secondly,
Georgia's game because his takedowns to so strong as almost always done from top
position on the ground is rare for George to be in bottom session on the ground.
Um,
and in a fight situation,
if you're already on top of someone and you've got the striking prowess of
George St Pierre,
I was happy to,
to coach a more in what we call a grapple boxing.
Just the skill of,
of grappling to punching on the ground that just made more sense for him.
Um,
he's competent and leg logging,
but he's not like Gary Thompson,
Eddie Cummings or Gordon Ryan.
He could have finished most black belts.
He absolutely.
But why would you stake a fight where literally millions of dollars have been
fought?
These are legacy on the line.
Why would you take that risk when you could just stay on time to punch him out?
Peggy did was say John Fetch for example.
Right.
Um,
so it didn't really make sense to push that hard on George.
your question though was,
okay,
well what about these other skills?
What about standing position?
Well.
Um,
I'm,
I'm fascinated not just by judges who are my martial arts in general.
And I've always believed all the various sports martial arts in the world have
areas where they are particularly strong.
For example,
I've always people make fun of taekwondo,
you know,
that are don't want us to talk with on him and me,
you'll back me up on this joke.
There are some taekwondo players out there at Olympic level who can kick with a
skill level that most people can't even imagine.
Um,
uh,
I've seen people like herb Perez kicking demonstrations where you're looking at
it as,
this is one of the most impressive things I've ever seen in my life.
And this is as the guy who,
if he hits you,
it's going to take your head off.
It's impressive to borrowers.
There wouldn't hurt.
Pres was in his prime.
I watched him
Kao quite a few people.
I watched him Kao uh,
one of the u s national champions with an ax care,
some of the worst Kaos have ever seen in my life came from taekwondo.
Like they tend to involve a jump spinning kicks with is just huge amounts of,
of,
of kinetic energy being the bell.
You see the same talking point fighting courtesies and terrible knock and point
finding good people make fun of these sports.
Like doing it on their own is the issue.
That's the issue.
That's the issue on their own.
They've got problems.
But if you can integrate that door well developed,
complete skillset,
they could be incredibly effective.
And I always saw tremendous potential for Tae Kwon dos jump,
spinning back kick.
No one does spinning back x better than taekwondo.
Yeah,
that's one of the main things.
And they do it incredibly well.
The set ups are fantastic that the application,
the mechanics,
everything's super impressive.
So I always thought that would be a,
you know,
George had a good spinning back kick,
but I thought that would be a nice addition.
You always want to be building new skills into upon or you don't,
you don't want to be that predictable guide where everyone knows what you're
doing.
And,
um,
uh,
and I know you came from taekwondo backgrounds and uh,
so I thought that would be an interesting thing for you to work on with him.
Well,
it was a funny conversation because that was my specialty.
Yes.
And so when you brought in,
I always wanted to talk to you.
I was fuck found your fascinating guy.
So when he came up to me and you said,
do you know anyone,
it's almost like a trick question.
It was a trick question.
You know where anyone besides your answer?
Like what I sat,
I was like,
I was hesitant.
okay,
you're not going to believe this.
But the truth is I knew you had a good jump spinning back kick.
I was trying to subtly did you,
how did you know word gets around Tom?
I thought you were just fucking with me.
I mean,
but I,
I felt like when I was telling you,
I was like,
man,
I don't even want it.
I wish I knew someone who did it with two L's.
You should have just been like,
yeah,
I've got the best jump spinning back kick in the fucking world.
I did jump spinning back kick quite a bit,
but I prefer a regular spinning back to you.
I want my foot on the ground cause I'm just going off of that foot.
There's a significant amount of force in the left leg forcing you pushing off
that back.
Interestingly you've seen some some guys out there now having good success and
even maybe that thing back,
cause I remember seeing Michael Page hit up beautiful when he's got everything
that guy can dairy impressive.
He's another guy who came from that point fighting background with,
you know,
you see Raymond Daniels and him and a lot of these guys from that background
that are defendant.
Daniel's worked with George for his last two fights.
Very,
very impressive guy.
Phenomenal.
Yeah.
And,
and again it's,
he had just the point fighting skills and now he's developing real boxing skills
and he's,
you know,
you've seen him in Beltour kickbox you know,
and you see the integration of the two.
It's phenomenal.
I mean,
he could just do things physically that most kickboxer just really don't know
what he's doing.
He'll,
he'll jump up and do what's called like a touch spinning back kick.
Like he'll jump up and touch you with the front leg.
I saw that.
He hit it in a glory
flight I believe.
Yeah,
yeah,
yeah.
He's phenomenal.
But the,
again,
when you see that it's like those things by themselves,
you're just going to get taken to the ground and smashed.
And most people,
unless you land one of those catastrophic spinning back kicks right away,
the odds are you,
you,
you need all those other things as well in order to be particularly effective.
Which is why George was such joy.
Yeah.
But that was a,
that was a fun moment.
It was an interesting because like I've always wanted to like show somebody
this.
It's cause it's a weird little thing that I know how to do.
Um,
going back to your original question,
the idea of Georgian and shoot box.
You'll see that Georgia's entire methodology in a standing position is built
around the concept of a dilemma that the Lemur is always between his jacket and
his take down.
People always talk about proactive and reactive takedowns.
Okay.
This guy's how reactive to discuss a proactive takedown guy.
The thing about George is he would use his jab proactively,
but he would use his takedowns reactively.
Now that's interesting because George would literally provoke people
you're saying as take down,
oh,
I just want to point this out past tense.
You're saying this like,
you know something.
I don't know.
No,
no,
no.
It's George just won the middleweight title,
relinquished the title and then the great speculation is will George fight
again?
Yeah.
The truth is no one knows because it comes down some medical problems.
George has,
uh,
he's got a problem on his stomach and a colitis.
What it is.
Yeah.
What is that exactly?
It's,
uh,
I'm not going to claim to be a medical expert,
but it's one of the most frustrating things that George has had to deal with
where there are certain parts of the human body that is out of your control and
the stomach is one of them.
Just things happening in your stomach,
you can't control it.
Things like stress seem to make it worse.
Um,
and uh,
uh,
the truth is that no one really knows at this point.
So,
um,
wherever this doubt,
my instinct is to think,
well,
you already want to come back,
George,
you've done all this and
what a great way to cap off a career too.
It was amazing.
It was embracing it.
I gotta tell you when he came back,
this is what was really interesting about that fight.
George had said,
I'm better,
I'm a better martial artist than I was before.
And he looked better.
He,
I mean,
he definitely looked like he was a little out of competition.
Like there was a moment,
should be how many fights,
you know,
it came back up to a four year layoff.
Very few.
But
skill wise,
he looked phenomenal.
I mean his striking looked incredibly smooth and I think you could see it in
Bisping's face like pretty early on.
Like this guy is,
this is not a rusty George Saint Pierre is not a small welterweight who's,
you know,
making his way in the,
where he looked huge.
He looked phenomenal.
His,
his technique,
the way he was landing leg kicks and his Sharp Jab.
And then ultimately that left hand that he used to stun Bisping and get 'em on
the ground.
I mean,
he looks sensational.
Yes.
Um,
uh,
you were there the night George went into his first retirement and you'll recall
the whole retirement thing was kind of,
the speech was vague.
It wasn't as confusing and um,
cause he didn't,
in truth he didn't know if he wanted to retire.
Um,
the whole thing was actually contrived in the octagon right there in front of
you.
I would be been a hard fight to training camp hadn't been the best camp though.
The five for Hendricks was,
uh,
George was unclear if he wanted to fight it all.
There were,
there's all kinds of controversies involved in the fight.
And um,
then when the fight was over,
it was,
it was a very close fight.
Um,
and uh,
uh,
he wasn't sure what he wanted to do.
There was a language miscommunication and ultimately he essentially,
he walked away from the game and he walked away for four years.
That's a long time to be out of a sport that as young as him or main,
which is evolving all the time every year the sport changes and uh,
the belts tend to change hands very,
very quickly.
Um,
so when George started talking to me about the idea of,
okay,
I want to come back,
I think I've still got can be,
I want to come back.
There's a desire,
passion.
My point to him was,
first off you show you really want to do this.
Like,
you know,
the last two fight camps,
it's tough.
You didn't seem to have the same kind of drives.
He used to have you show you want to do this.
Is this like a middle aged fantasy he had going through here?
And he said,
none of that.
I feel this,
I want to come back.
So my question to him was,
if you're going to come back,
I was going to do the same thing.
You just going to come back to welterweight and do what you always did,
which has come out and beat the base welterweights and just hold a title.
It's going to be doing the same thing.
I thought if you're going gonna come back,
let's do something significant.
Something you haven't done before.
And so the way I put it to him was,
what are the three most persistent criticisms you always hear about George Saint
Pierre?
Number one,
you never fought up a weight class.
Never went up.
Number two,
you fought.
So tactically sound was such an emphasis on a strategy and techniques or what
have you.
That matches could become dull.
That the average fan was like,
well,
yeah,
he's,
he's winning easily.
It's dominant,
but it doesn't do it for,
it's not excited.
No drama in the funds on gun.
Um,
so he had this idea that uh,
on the one hand,
uh,
he was very technically sound strategically deep,
but the fights weren't as exciting as they ought to be.
Um,
the idea that he'd never gone up a weight category and the third most persistent
Chris and we didn't finish fights.
Okay.
He,
it was a very skilled fighter.
It wasn't finishing fights.
So my point is,
okay,
if you're going to come back,
let's do it in a way where you address those three things.
Okay.
George is always concerned about his legacy as a fighter.
And if there were three persistent criticisms of George NPS legacy,
it was those three things.
You're not finishing fights,
you never went up a weight class and you're too tactical.
Okay.
You're not,
you're not providing the drama that a fight should.
So I said,
let's change things.
We've got in that four years previous to that,
whenever I was training George,
I was training him for a fight.
He was,
now he's fighting.
Nick Diaz is finding cars,
condos,
finding,
you know,
whoever.
And it was always getting him ready for a fight.
You Find Matt Hughes in two months.
Let's get ready now.
You're a tired.
I'm not going to train you to find some dude going to train you in Jujitsu.
Freddie Roach.
It's kind of train you in boxing
in this sense.
We could.
We hit the time now to start working on finishing skills.
A significant change occurred where my primary emphasis in training George in
that four year layoff was in submissions.
Now happily that happened at what time?
The time the school,
it was coming out,
so I had a group of some of the best submission peoples in the world for George
to work with,
so it was submission started getting better.
Suddenly,
George Saint Pierre,
he got on your back as a problem.
He submitting people in the gym.
I could run off some names.
I won't do it because it's not the thing to do,
but I could run off some names of people he submitted an agenda would shock you
like well known Jujitsu people and for the first time he's our primary versus
wasn't on grapple walks in.
It was submission
Freddie Roach was working on,
on the mechanics of punching.
George always had good in out movement.
It was head.
I get karate movement,
the um,
the ability,
he always had a strong jab,
but now he's teaching them how to sit on a punch.
Suddenly George had a left hook.
Okay.
And you're a guy who can integrate left,
uh,
left hand chip between Jab and lived til gets a dangerous man.
I'm gonna.
Um,
everyone was worried,
you know,
there's so much overreaction to George's Jab.
There's suddenly left talk opportunities.
We're working it up and now he was sitting on that left hook and people getting
hurt.
So now for the first time you got a guy who's got submissions and he's hitting
with genuine power.
As he came back,
it was a question of who's going to be the opponent?
And the next thing I say it is,
well,
you know,
went up a weight division,
go to 85
now.
Now
was any consideration about going up to 85 because the fact that Bisping was the
champion,
no.
George has trained with business.
That decision was made before piston?
Was The champion real?
Yeah.
How far in advance was a decision made?
Because Bisbing a defendant against head understand where maybe this one against
four
year project.
Okay.
I didn't know during initially,
initially I couldn't make that decision because at another student of mine,
Chris Weidman was the one 85 pound champion and Chris and Georgia never fight
each other.
But once that was no longer an issue,
then it was like,
hey,
this,
this could work,
this could be interesting.
So d during the entire four years he was talking about eventually becoming,
not the entire four years now,
but he was training the whole time and I was pushing him a kid,
you don't fight anymore.
Let's do some submission grappling.
Right.
Okay.
Um,
he stuck with Freddie Roach.
He,
he loves working with Freddie Roach.
And,
um,
uh,
so the training was going in different direction.
Who is this Moitai coach?
Um,
mostly he works at Ferrazzi Hobby and,
and tries to that,
but that's more,
uh,
integrated for us is a black belt of mine.
So he,
um,
often,
uh,
does Jujitsu with,
for us.
We had,
I teach for us in frost that does a good job there.
Um,
but for us,
uh,
ties things together,
let's his principal function and I know he trained with Phil nurse for a while
as well.
Then he trained with a lot of guys who came out of uh,
uh,
Thailand itself from Tiger Moy,
Tai,
um,
uh,
yard.
That's a shortening of his actual name.
They will have very long names,
but a yard was one of his trainers.
They trained him prior to condit and Diaz,
um,
uh,
did a fine job.
So there's never been a shortage of coaches in his life,
but uh,
there are certain things that seem to gel with them more than others.
Interesting leader.
In that four year period,
George had a strong rebirth into karate and worked with a lot of specialized
creative people,
including Raymond Daniels and others.
Uh,
they came from the,
mostly from the European point fighting karate,
a circuit,
and he was working with them a lot.
And so somewhere or the cross,
a certain poor period of time where you're dealing with a different athletes.
Now,
this is the guy who's had four years off and the train had gone in different
directions.
It's finishing skills in both fisticuffs and grappling had gotten considerably
better.
Um,
he was toying with the idea of going up to 85 and experimented with diet and et
Cetera to get his body weight up.
That's never an easy thing to do.
And tactically he was working more that on the idea of being an exciting fighter
through movement and pushing harder for the finish.
And,
uh,
and I thought those were three very,
very healthy directions to go and,
and,
um,
uh,
this would,
as it were,
if he did come back,
this would be offer a genuine opportunity to address the three most persistent
criticism of his Korea.
Initially,
there was a lot of resistance from the UFC.
I don't think they were fond of the idea at all.
They wanted him to go to one 70 and,
and do what he had done.
And uh,
but George pushed hard for the,
uh,
for the fight at 85.
And ultimately it happened in a rather strange way.
Tyrone Woodley had a fight at one 70.
What Shum,
uh,
wasn't the most crowd pleasing fight and uh,
George St Pierre was supposed to fight Tyrone Woodley.
And in UFC is,
you know what five bays mean it's on,
so they,
we chose the Madison Square Garden.
That's one of the great fight capitols of the world and it's how it happened.
So there was consideration and fighting one 70?
Yes.
And so this was the UFC his idea,
but what about your python for I,
I thought first of all,
I'm,
I'm not the matchmaker.
I'm not the main policy making under,
I don't want to say that I was the guy that,
I was the guy that suggested those ideas and George seems to like the idea,
he said,
if I'm going to come back,
if I'm going to take the risk of a four year layoff and come back,
it's a big risk.
I mean Muhammad Ali came back after three years and had to warm up fights and
still lost his title phone.
But Muhammad Ali really wasn't working out.
That was when the Vietnam war thing,
it happens mostly doing tours of college game.
It wasn't really working out the whole time and improving.
You can see the difference in Muhammad Ali,
his body when he came back,
it's still,
there's many other examples that you,
sugar ray Leonard came back after layoffs.
He had one successful and one very unsuccessful come back and he was working
hard the whole time.
So coming back,
cause it's,
it's a hard,
tricky thing on many levels too.
Not just physical but also the psychological.
So now this collitus thing is thrown a monkey wrench into the gears.
If actually it threw a monkey wrench during the camp.
Really?
I could tell you some stories about that.
That camp was,
uh,
as,
as good as the four years was.
The camp itself,
I,
I can say it now because it's over,
was a disaster.
It was probably the worst camp I've ever been involved.
Uh,
I was coaching of course the scored for ADCC.
So,
uh,
ADCC I believe was around six weeks,
before Georges fight.
So I was in Finland and communicating with George and he's like feeling good.
Let's get the moment I get back,
I'm just going to get on a plane from Finland to Montreal and start the camp.
Uh,
George sent me out.
I've got stomach issues and I was like,
what do you mean stomach issues?
What does that even mean now?
Um,
uh,
about two weeks into the camp,
the issues got so bad that George literally could not.
Now this is a six week fight camp.
It's a very short camp.
Back in the day we used to do eight to 12 weeks,
but George thought of shorter camp,
we would be better.
He as he's getting older,
he wanted to shorter camp.
First two weeks were okay,
but I was in,
uh,
the aftermath of the Finland expedition and um,
when I first went up,
George said,
I've got to cancel.
Okay.
I,
uh,
I can't train
fights four weeks away
and George took two weeks off.
It was a critical moment on a Friday evening where I say it to for Rasa Hobby,
this is the second time I've had to say this to,
for our salary.
The other was the Carlos condit camp.
I say George.
And training by Monday we can to pull the plug.
There's no other way.
And we were talking about a four year layoff and this camp is lost.
It's dead in the water.
So four weeks out he takes two weeks off.
Uh,
I believe it might've been five.
I'll check the dates later,
but I'm very close to it.
There was a critical two week period where during that two weeks,
what is he able to do?
Essentially?
Nothing.
Yeah.
Just no train light drilling some movement.
And uh,
he,
he was,
it,
it occurred the worst possible time.
It,
it wasn't at the start of the cameras in the middle of the camp so that the
first two weeks were lost because then,
uh,
we had two weeks of inactivity.
Then there's two weeks left.
And I remember the first time I went up,
I bought Jake Shields,
Gary Turner and Gordon Ryan with me.
We came up and we went through some drills on the ground and,
and I was happy,
you know,
Joseph Del k on the ground.
He did fine against the score guys.
And,
um,
uh,
we worked on some specialized grabbing stuff and then the next day he went to a
shoe box workout.
Now I could sit here all day until you adventures of George St Pierre Doing shoe
box training with people.
I've seen him spot everybody.
Okay.
I'm not going to mention names,
but I've seen George Saint Pierre takedown
effortlessly.
Some of the biggest names in mixed martial arts in weight divisions,
far above his own.
So many times per around.
You just lose count.
Nigga.
I,
I'm,
I'm afraid to even tell you the stories because people wouldn't believe me.
Um,
I'm used to seeing George Saint Pierre Shoot,
boxing bap,
bap,
Bang down.
Right.
Okay.
Um,
I've seen that since the thought of his career,
I watched George Saint Pierre to a shoe box workout where he couldn't score a
take down.
This is a fights two weeks away.
I'm just looking,
going like,
holy heck,
what is this?
He's getting hit.
He's getting frustrated,
he's getting tired.
And I said to,
for us,
you know,
this is,
this is a crisis.
This is one of the biggest UFC shows of the year.
It's Madison Square Garden.
He's the headline.
The USC had to pull some big things to get this fight to happen.
They didn't originally didn't want it.
If we pull out now,
it's going to look like a disaster.
It's going to be George let the UFC down.
Um,
and to his everlasting credit,
George said,
I'll be back on Monday and I'll be better.
We went up and,
uh,
he,
he is,
he dug in deep.
What can I tell you?
He's a trooper.
He,
um,
he trained every day,
those last two weeks and as each day went by,
there was significant improvement.
And I remember there was a distinct moment,
about five days before the end of the camp,
I swung to a shoot box workout and he looked like the old George and I was like,
okay,
I believe in this kid again.
You can do it.
Jamie,
will you please Google?
Collitus I don't know enough.
I believe he should.
What the goals?
Ulcerative colitis.
Yeah.
I don't know.
It's so it,
it's something to do with stomach ulcers.
Um,
I'm not going to claim to be an expert,
but,
uh,
yeah,
I can tell you what the symptoms were.
I was extreme stomach pain and inability to eat at,
screwed up his entire diet.
And when did it start?
Uh,
it's not an early in the camp and got progressively worse.
And then for the camp there was no issues.
Uh,
ulcerative colitis is usually only,
uh,
in innermost lining of the large intestine,
colon and rectum forms range from mild to severe.
Having all sort of colitis puts a patient at increased risk of developing colon
cancer symptoms including rectal bleeding,
bloody diarrhea,
abdominal cramps and pain.
And it sounds like a party.
Yeah.
If you read the,
can you bring it back,
read the first four treatment,
can help with this condition,
cannot be cured,
requires a medical diagnosis,
lab tests or imaging.
Always required chronic can last for years or be lifelong.
It's incredibly frustrating for him to deal with and says treatments,
including medications and surgery.
Yeah.
So it's a forgery,
but,
uh,
it appeared to back off a little bit in the last two weeks.
He came back and he,
um,
this is the kind of person,
George Saint Pierre.
It's the morning of the fight.
Saturday morning we're in New York City in the hotel room,
uh,
for Rasa,
hobby,
Freddie Roach and myself,
or at the breakfast table,
George comes down for breakfast and he's weighed in,
he looks at his breakfast,
has originally the plan,
because it was a fight at one 85,
was to have George come in at a,
at a higher body weight,
but he ended up weighing 191 pounds,
which is exactly the same as it used to fight at welterweight,
the same body weight.
So that was kind of a disappointment,
you know.
Um,
and uh,
he quietly excuse himself and went to the bathroom.
Everyone else went away to do their things.
And I sat there and I realized he's in the bathroom for an hour.
He came out and I would say,
Joe,
do you okay?
And he looked at me,
he said,
I'm fine,
but I knew he wasn't.
And then he went out for it.
Um,
and then afterwards he told me,
dude,
I was in so much pain and he was afraid to tell me because he would worry that
if I cornered him and I thought he was compromised,
I wouldn't call him the way I normally would,
that I would doubt him.
So he kept it all inside,
didn't say a word.
And,
uh,
he's a good kid,
you know,
he can't help it in market like that.
Wow.
Well that's what makes them a champion.
Yeah.
That's one of the things.
It's,
it's less than perfect conditions.
He could still rise to the occasion,
the less than perfect.
It was a very far from perfect.
Now you said that during the Johnny Hendricks fight,
uh,
during the camp for that fight,
when he decided to impromptu retire inside the octagon,
that there was talk during the camp that he didn't want to fight.
Yeah.
What was that about?
Uh,
really seen it around two things.
One,
I can just,
I can not discuss because it involves a personal life.
Joe San Pa,
there was some things going on in his personal life that,
um,
uh,
deeply affected him and he was deeply unhappy with some circumstances in his
personal life and it's not appropriate for me to talk about those.
Um,
and the second was the whole idea that it'd become an obsession with George at
that time,
which is the use of anabolic steroids in mixed martial arts.
And um,
and he was deeply unhappy with what he perceived as the prevalence of the use of
anabolic steroids in mixed martial arts as a whole.
And among his opponents in particular.
And um,
uh,
he wanted a testing program to be bought in for that fight.
There was talk about it but nothing came of it.
And it became like this psychological obsession during the camp and uh,
uh,
between those two issues,
there was a lot of unhappiness.
He came in,
he did was train,
you know,
he's,
he's a professional athlete.
It's not like he missed workouts or anything crazy like there wasn't a going out
at night or anything foolish,
but there was a degree of unhappiness where I'm looking and thinking how much
longer can this go on?
Now there was some talk about the Tyron Woodley fight and then Tyron had this
bad performance,
but if George did get healthy and was confident enough in his health that he
could get through,
get through an actual training camp,
would he be interested in considering a fight with Tyron Woodley?
Absolutely.
I think Tyron Woodley is a great champion.
I know he gets a lot of steak,
a lot of flag.
That kid is talented,
very talented,
very good.
And he doesn't think George wants to fight him.
He was on the podcast the other day.
Yeah.
I,
I think,
uh,
people say that for reasons so that they can motivate someone to find et Cetera,
et cetera.
There's a political aspect to it and I think that both athletes have a deep
respect for each other.
Um,
Tara [inaudible] is a very,
very difficult opponent to beat is people criticize his style,
but people don't understand difference between regular fighting and championship
fighting.
Championship fighting is about winning and losing and you got to do what you
gotta do to win.
That's the first consideration.
It's nice to impress the crowd.
It's nice to do this or that.
But ultimately it's about what are you going to do to win?
What do you,
what are you going to do to beat the second best guy in the world?
That's a difficult,
difficult thing.
It has to be done correctly.
This idea of fighting to entertain and then this is a very complex thing and you
talked about it with,
uh,
George addressing that are attempting to address that in his comeback and trying
to finish and be more energetic and aggressive.
But the reality is that's not always the best way to engage.
There's is a right way to fight a person with a particular skillset.
And especially in the Woodley,
uh,
versus,
Stephen Wonderboy Thompson fights.
Yeah.
I was like,
this is the only way to fight that guy.
You cannot,
I mean,
unless you are what he is,
which is a,
a very skillful traditional martial artists that has this very unique ability to
bend at the waist,
like a snake and slide in with techniques.
And it does a lot off the front leg.
Dangerous stuff off the front leg.
Unless you can do that too.
You really shouldn't be on the outside striking with him.
It's just,
it's just too weird that styles too weird.
So he kind of had the lay back and if you,
and I think again,
if you look at the results of the fight,
the times in the fight where someone was hurt,
it was Tyron Woodley putting the hurt on Wonderboy Thompson.
Yes.
Those are the only times in the fight where it was really exciting.
Other than that,
it was sort of Wonderboy kind of trying to pick out them from the outside and
um,
it's a very difficult fight to look good at.
Um,
you know,
the whole idea of mixed martial arts fans,
there's always three kinds of people that watch mixed martial arts.
There's fans of drama is fans of violence and his fans of strategy and
technique.
Guys like us,
when we watch MMA,
we fall into the technique and strategy guy.
That's the guy to me.
I can watch Woodley flight one,
the boy.
And I'm fascinated by that.
To me that's just like,
wow,
this said magic.
Yeah,
I can watch it all day.
Um,
many of the fans want to see violence.
That's what they're tracking too.
And it's a significant portion.
Um,
others like the idea of drama and athletes in a sense have to brand themselves
according to one of those three choices.
George always branded himself as the technique and strategy guy.
Tyron Woodley's struggling with that.
Now himself,
he's doing the same thing.
Um,
Calcitonin is the quintessential drama fighter.
He didn't really have an exciting fighting style and he was never really a
technique and strategy guy.
So he went with drama.
So He'd done vocally,
um,
you know,
get violence based,
find someone who's a mop.
How Jaros that's his appeal.
You know the Johnson,
yeah.
Rumble Johnson that it's a violence.
Okay.
He's not into drama is not going to talk anything.
He's not gonna.
He's not,
no one is stuck as strategy and t neat guy.
He's going to come out and do the same thing every fight and it's going to be a
violent finish.
Um,
so every fighter has to,
as it were,
identify what's his ear,
what's he gonna do,
what's going to be his appeal on work within that.
And um,
you know,
Tyron is learning.
It's not an easy thing to do.
You get criticism from certain,
uh,
as we said,
the other two elements of the,
of,
of the mixed martial arts audience,
that seems like the big fight.
It's certainly the big fight for Tyron,
but it seems like the big five for Georges.
Yeah.
My only um,
reservation,
uh,
when
you,
when you say,
is this the big fight,
is it essentially,
it's the same fight that George did for a decade.
It's George against another very,
very tough welterweight.
What you did for 10 years was life.
Yeah.
But Tyron is,
he's especially dangerous.
I mean,
he's a more,
I think he's more dangerous than Hendricks.
I think he's more dangerous than nails guys.
I think his ability to put you away with one shot is,
but you could say top of the food chain tricks was putting people away with one
shelf is,
you know,
yeah,
he was Hendrix's fascinating case.
And we should probably talk about that once the camera stops.
Um,
he's a,
he was a fascinating case and I can understand,
um,
why he was so successful.
But you know,
there's a lot to maintaining that.
There's a lot too is one thing to get to a position where you are a world class
fighter.
It's like how long can you keep that up for her?
And one of the most impressive aspects of George's career was the fact that
George was able to keep that up for so long.
People don't understand this.
They A,
um,
it's incredibly tough to become a UFC champion,
but however tough net is,
it's 10 times tougher to stay there.
Um,
and on so many different levels too.
It's not just a physical thing.
You,
the moment you become champion,
you become the most studied fighter in the world.
Yeah.
Everyone knows every little weakness.
They see every little strength and they can negate it and um,
psychologically it's tough to,
you know,
every time the other guy fights,
it's the biggest fight of his life where he's,
every time you find it,
it's just another fun.
Is He a 10th title?
Defense fields is another flight for the other guy across the ring.
This is the biggest moment of his life.
He's coming at you with everything he's got.
This is his moment of glory.
This is literally gonna change his life and keep them still UFC champion feel
his the next fight.
That's the question was like is it possible for a champion to maintain it
challenges intensity through a 10 title fight defect or do you just have to
accept the fact that you're dealing with a completely different mind space?
I think ultimately you have to drop the whole pretense that it's about intensity
because no,
I don't believe anyone can hold the same amount of intensity of a teen years of
preparation.
You have to start thinking in terms of,
I'm going to defend my title with technique and strategy,
because if you go with intensity,
you can only hold intensity so long it's going to diminish and time as you get
paid more,
as you get tired,
as you get injured,
as years go by,
the intensity drops.
Now,
when you analyze various fighters of today,
who stands out to you?
Oh,
it's a lot.
There's some very,
very impressive people.
A guy who impresses me enormously is Demetrius Johnson.
Yeah,
I extremely impressed this.
I think he's the
greatest of all time.
Um,
it's,
it's hard to,
graceful time is such a tough thing to say.
It's um,
uh,
with Demetrius to the open question is always going to be what was the level of
competition.
Right?
But that's not his fault.
He can only fight the guys that give you what's like Roy Jones Jr when Roy was
in his prime.
Yeah.
Same sort of situation.
Yet he was so much better than everybody else.
It's like how good were these guys?
I mean they were worldclass guys,
but against him,
they just looked like they didn't belong in there.
What you typically find is that when you come to a cs who's the greatest of all
time,
it's always going to come down to criteria.
And um,
each guy,
his his strong point,
his claim to fame,
as far as,
you know,
I was the bass guy of all time.
Um,
let's stick with just UFC champions.
Otherwise we could live discussion would be too great if we go into pride and
you know,
he's getting is going to get out of control.
Um,
but Demetrius Johnson's,
uh,
his,
his claim to fame is,
is the completeness with which he's winning fights.
He's using everything beautifully.
He's knocking,
you know,
he's hitting people.
He's,
he's clenching people.
he's hitting clinched knockouts.
You know,
you don't see it as often in the USC.
Um,
he's incredibly good on the ground.
A few times he gets in trouble.
He seems to navigate his way out without a problem.
Um,
this a completeness in a skillset,
which is incredibly impressive.
Okay?
He's integrating wrestling and striking and ways that just deeply,
deeply impressive.
Um,
you'll get someone like a Jose Aldo who's right up there in terms of,
you know,
as he wanted the grace of all time.
Um,
a sad thing about USC is that,
uh,
UFC fans I should say,
is that people have very short memories.
You a guy loses a couple of fights and suddenly he sucks.
And it's like,
dude,
Jose Aldo was a killer and you kill it for 10 years.
Um,
and uh,
obviously a very,
very skilled,
he had that and um,
and he fought,
you know,
many tough opponents.
And uh,
do you feel like when you see a guy,
like,
although you were just seeing the miles,
the miles pile up,
or do you think that Max Holloway,
he's not that good?
It's not that all of that.
All 32.
Yeah.
So I'm,
I'm reluctant to say it's the miles and also wholesale to it didn't really take
a lot of damage and it's crazy.
And he's,
he's not like a guy that got knocked out five times and you know,
it came back.
So in terms of like the damage he took in his age,
I don't think it's a question of miles and his,
do you think as a team it's a question of the game just passing them by,
um,
new levels of the game?
I,
that's,
that's a great question.
Well,
I feel like Max Holloway style was almost like the perfect.
Yeah.
A lot of it comes out to styles and um,
and you're right,
uh,
Holloway's awkward distancing and things like very good distancing but also
phenomenal endurance,
unbelievable mental toughness,
extreme confidence in himself.
And he has the ability to break guys just puts a piece on them very nick like in
that regard.
Yeah.
It just puts that pace on him.
And you saw it with Aldo.
You see all those start to wilt almost thought is strongly in both cases.
Yes.
He had a very strong,
well that's his thing though.
He's so explosive and he sprints essentially.
But you really can't do that.
I mean,
his style is highlighted by incredibly explosive,
fast movement and Max is not.
Maxxis is about avoiding and then accumulation of bombs,
a of techniques keep it on you keep and also his well-roundedness his ability to
submit you ability to absorb shots,
maintain composure when being fired upon all those things.
Incredible strengths of his but particularly,
uh,
matched up against Aldo.
His strengths really shine.
Yes.
Yeah,
but that's a,
Eh,
a whole mark of if you're going to call someone that already of times they have
to be able to take on a wide array of upon
yeah and still be successful.
Which is why Demetrius gets my vote.
I just feel like when you look at Benevidez,
when you look at,
uh,
th this many different people that he fought,
showed him a bunch of different looks,
bunch of different styles and he was able to overwhelm the mall.
Wilson Hayes,
what's your assessment of his fight against Dominick Cruz?
Apple Weight Division.
See,
I look at that as a learning experience.
A different era.
A different guy.
He had a full time job back then.
It wasn't the same thing happens if he finds Dominick Cruz is second time.
I'm fascinated by that.
I want to see him fight TJ dental shop.
I think that's the big fight because Tj is willing to go down to 125.
So instead of fighting Dominick at one 35,
Tj is like,
I can make one 25 and Tj feels like he'll be the guy to break the legacy.
He'll be far bigger,
stronger.
It feels like he can match them speed for speed and he thinks he can make the
weight comfortably.
I'm really fascinated by that fight.
Um,
because also I think Tj is one of the few guys that's trained,
uh,
by,
I think Matt Hume is one of the great unsung heroes of MMA.
I agree with.
He's a master,
fascinating,
fascinating guy.
Incredibly intelligent,
deep,
deep knowledge of the sport.
Both stand up and on the ground and,
and integrating those two things together.
He's one of the few guys
you can genuinely say his,
um,
uh,
expertise across all areas of mixed martial arts and played a pivotal role in
taking someone from being an unknown to a legitimate,
Greg will champion,
um,
all the time.
I see people who,
people often don't make a distinction between recruiters and coaches.
Okay.
This,
there's many fight camps out there that are very good at recruiting people that
were already good and helping them to manage them,
et Cetera,
and make them slightly better.
The world's full of recruiters,
but there's not many coaches out there.
Matt Hume took a kid who'd known,
had heard of and took him from obscurity to arguably one of the base of old
time.
Okay.
Um,
and he,
he did it in a way with that that kid went from being essentially a wrestler to
a genuinely well rounded mixed martial artist with a complete set of skills.
Uh,
that's an impressive accomplishment.
Yeah.
Um,
and it's also his,
the way he does it,
the way he fights,
how little damage he takes.
Yes.
It's his movement,
his,
uh,
ability to control like,
a good example,
Dodson,
he fought John Dodson who's unbelievably explosive and fast and dangerous and
just overwhelmed him.
If Demetrius Johnson didn't exist,
would have been a very good champion.
Oh yeah.
Highly regarded champion.
Yeah.
That people don't realize how good some of these opponents,
Audi and,
and they say,
oh,
I see the level of a Ponant that goodwill Dalton's it.
He's a very good Dotson was especially a few years ago.
It's extremely dangerous.
He seems to be in a bit of a Rut down,
whether it's a psychological rod or a physical Rut.
It was not quite the same guy that he used to be.
But you know,
it's hard when a guy best you,
the way that mighty mouse best too,
because it seems like the level of talent is so far above where you're at,
that you,
it's like you left with a dilemma.
Like,
how do I catch this guy,
Ken?
Is it even possible for me to catch them?
Because they had two fights and the second fight mighty mouse won handily.
The first fight was closer.
The first fight was more dangerous.
He got hit a few times,
but in the second fight,
mighty mouse just showed leaps and bounds and it was just a route he just ran
him over.
Um,
the other arguments are Anderson Anderson in his prime is one of the,
uh,
it's a great argument for the greatest of all time,
you know,
uh,
outside of the UFC it's fate or I think those are really the only arguments for
the greatest of all times.
And George George's in there,
especially coming back and beating Bisping that puts him,
you know,
right back into the mix.
And in terms of a argument of one of the greatest of all time.
Yeah,
I think it was an important step for him because as I said,
there were three persistent criticisms and he answered all three in one night.
So,
um,
that definitely helps his case.
What's your thought on,
could be number of Madoff?
Extremely embraced.
His kid is a deeply,
deeply impressive.
I've um,
uh,
he's coming to the academy a couple of times before fights.
I've never actually seen him train.
Um,
he uh,
after his fight in Madison Square Garden,
he bought himself and a group of his friends,
his training partners came into the academy and trained in my Monday afternoon
class.
Could be,
didn't train.
He just sat on the bench.
Cause he'd just support on Saturday nights.
Of course he's not going to train,
but his,
um,
his,
uh,
his training partners came in and trained with a squad and that was a fun
afternoon.
They rolled with,
um,
I think mostly Nikki Ryan and um,
uh,
it's hard for them of course,
because it's submission grappling.
That's not really what they do.
They do more the interface of,
of,
um,
grappling to bind with striking.
So they had a hard time of it.
But,
uh,
he struck me as a very,
very nice person.
He shockingly big for his weight division,
shockingly,
shockingly.
So,
um,
like all the people coming out of the Caucasus regions of Russia has wrestling
is extremely good.
Um,
they have probably the base wrestling program in the world,
that whole area stretching from,
uh,
asitia through Dagestan's or Chechnya,
all the way down to Iran at that areas as the hotbed of wrestling in the world.
And it shows all their fighters.
They're all strong and wrestling and in night is add to that,
the various skills.
And you've got a tough,
tough group of people.
Yeah,
I was extremely,
I bet I've been impressed with every single performance he's had in the octagon.
I mean,
he's a undefeated,
which is incredibly rare in and of itself,
but in the hundred and 55 pound division,
even more impressive.
But the way he mauled Barboza shocking Jesus Christ and that you could see the
fight was essentially over halfway through round one.
Yes.
You could see it in Barboza his face.
It was drained.
Yeah.
That was an incredibly impressive performance.
Um,
I,
uh,
obviously there's still,
you can't put them yet in the grace of all time category,
but he hasn't won a title.
Hasn't even challenge for it.
Yeah.
But you definitely get the sense that if,
if he had had a title fight by now,
he probably would've been a champion by now hem versus Connor,
Jesus Christ.
That's what I want to say.
Him versus Connor and Russia or him versus Tony,
Tony Ferguson.
And then would be a very interesting fight.
Well.
What's interesting about those two fights as you have basically polar opposites
can be minimum and get all this a control based Phaidon whereas Tony Focus in is
a scramble based fight them and just that clash in styles.
It's going to be fascinating with regards Conor McGregor and could be minimum
get off.
The feeling one gets is that if they did fight it would be a complete shutout in
one of two directions.
It's either like a man beating up a child on the ground or it's just a flush
knock out a guy unable to cover distance properly and walking into a left hand
and just we ain't catastrophic k OTE and you feel like there's potential for it
to go in both directions.
Uh,
and
that's a fight I don't think goes to the distance.
It's uh,
it's one way or the other.
Yeah,
I agree.
Um,
I feel like what Connor presents,
it's interesting in terms of danger is speed and one shot knock out power with
his hands and could be,
has been hurt coming in by Michael Johnson.
It's really the only adversity ever suffered inside the occupant.
And he dealt with it.
Well that's a good sign for debate.
It's a sliver of hope that every opponent claims to,
they watched that one moment where Michael Johnson clipped him and be like,
look,
he's human.
Yeah.
Think you'd be hurt.
It's like the terminator if it bleeds.
Okay.
I believe that this predator.
Oh yeah.
What'd I say?
Terminator?
You just fucked up your reference.
Sorry,
I'm sweaty.
Ah,
yeah,
I did fuck it up.
Um,
but I think that Connor has been overwhelmed on the ground though and he's been
overwhelmed by Nate.
Yeah.
And he's been controlled in the ground by Chad.
One gets the feeling that whatever amount of control they were able to impose on
them,
it would be nothing compared with what could be,
could impose more of a,
could be.
Um,
it's a much more dangerous form of control.
Could be.
Yes.
It could be,
has a program of hitting people on the ground,
which is substantially better than either of the two athletes you just
mentioned.
Yes.
Um,
and big differences when it could be,
gets you on the ground.
You're not getting up.
No.
You're getting mauled.
And it's almost like a spider.
Like he's injecting venom into you and slowly but surely like weakening your
body.
Yeah.
Like you,
you see after the first round when Barboza gets up,
it's like,
okay,
you mean he's,
he's alive still.
But this is a different person now and going into the second round,
I mean,
the Barboza gave an admirable kind of himself.
he showed himself to be a true warrior.
He did try a couple of spinning back kick.
Yeah.
Some of them were relatively close.
Our Bose is kicking.
Heavy strategy though is very different than Connors Connors kicks or just the
opposite.
His kicks are just probes.
He sort of poking at you,
poking at you and it putting things out in front of you and he's just trying to,
just trying to drop that hard left hand on you.
It's a fascinating guy.
It was fascinating.
I always undervalued him.
When he first came in the UFC,
I said,
oh,
that's high,
but typing it.
But the more I started the little wrestle,
he's very,
very skilled.
While he's also,
he Mindfox people.
He mind fucks people in a way that,
um,
but I don't think he's mind fucking could be anything that works on could be.
I don't think that's going to happen.
I just think there's dealing with a totally different kind of human being.
Does people from Dagestan are just so hard.
It's just a hard part of the world.
They're just,
they're made of hardier stuff.
You know what I mean?
It's just like they have to deal with way more.
Not that people in Ireland are soft.
They're fucking hard people too.
I just think that with,
I've always said the most important,
if you have a pyramid of technique,
when it comes to a mixed martial arts,
the base of the pyramid,
the most important thing is the ability to control the grappling,
the ability to take a guy down.
If you can take a guy down and control him,
you have a significant advantage.
You can choose where the fight takes place and if you're competent in the
standup,
which could be was definitely competent in the standup.
So you are adequate in the standup but overwhelming when it gets to the ground.
You can present problems with a guy standing up and which,
which case his problems.
The guy has to deal with the striking aspects which opened up the takedowns.
Um,
I wholeheartedly agree with you,
but I'll go a little further.
Whenever someone asks me what are the,
what are the programs that,
well,
what do you look for when you see a guy dominating fights?
What,
what,
what makes someone go in the right directions with their training and
[inaudible] fighting itself.
I always say there's three things.
If you show me a fighter who can,
one,
dominate the setups to dominate the pace of the fight.
And three,
how can I phrase this?
Dominate the simple direction of the fight.
Three things dominate the setups,
dominate the pace,
dominate the direction.
You show me a fighter who can do those three things and I'll show you a fighter
who can win 95% of the fights he gets into
dominate the setups,
dominate the pace,
dominantly direction.
Thinking about someone that could be,
or anyone who comes from a a,
a strong wrestling or judo,
Jujitsu with takedowns baseline is they always going to hit a dominated
direction.
They determine whether it goes down to the ground over there.
It say standing
to be always dominates the pace of the fight.
Once you're on the ground,
you're on top.
The other guys is reacting to what you're doing,
trying to get back up to his feet,
et Cetera,
et cetera.
You're dominating pace.
If there's one weakness that could be pairs is,
is not as strong.
It dominating the setups to get to those areas where he can dominate,
pays and uh,
et Cetera,
et cetera.
If he's going to lose a fight,
it's going to be in their area and corner more than anything else.
As a guy who dominates the setups you set up before the kicks,
a probe,
they're not kicks.
It's not trying to hurt you with the kicks.
He's probing.
He hurts you with this.
Okay.
So Connor skill is,
he's a master of dominating setups,
especially in a standing position,
but to beavs mastery.
Out of those three critical areas for domination and all forms of fighting is
he's a dominant,
uh,
he's incredibly dominant in determining the direction of the fight and the pace
of the fight.
That's why he never gets tired and it's white.
It's got a very high work rate,
but he never gets tired.
He never see him just completely shattered despite the fact he's working hard
the whole time.
And the fight,
despite the fact that he is significantly weakens themselves to make 155 pounds,
which apparently he's done far better now.
He had a real nutritionist heading into this camp and it was much easier for him
to cut the weight.
I'd be fascinated to see him fight at one 70 and,
well,
that's a plan.
Apparently that was the plan and Willie was joking around about it saying he,
he'll send them nutritionists.
So sell to keep his psycho ass down at one 55 was his exact,
that's fine.
Yeah.
With regards to your point before you saying the,
this,
this core combat skill,
the most important one that you as a commentator look for when you look at fine,
it's,
you know,
um,
can you determine,
uh,
you,
you put grappling
skill as the number one same way there'd be wrestling with every Samba at the
beach you get,
so what have you.
Um,
I would go through them and say,
yeah,
there's three things that I look for who dominates the setups,
who dominates the pace,
who dominates the direction.
Now what are your thoughts about strength and conditioning for mixed martial
arts fighters?
That's,
um,
that's a huge question,
but the question is like,
what takes precedent?
Does skill training take precedent?
Like there's several schools of thought and um,
one of them would be,
well,
one of the more interesting ones is nick curse on and Marvin Marinovich that
camp.
They believe that you already know how to fight and that what the camp really
should be about is just radical strength and conditioning to the point where,
let's,
uh,
that's a mixed question then.
Are you talking about a fight camp or he's talking about fight training over the
year?
Let's,
let's talk about a fight camp and specific.
Okay.
Average fight camp is around,
uh,
six to eight weeks and has the longest you ever heard,
it's like a 10 to 12 weeks.
That's a,
that's a very,
very long fight camp.
Um,
how much physiological change can you affect in the body in six to eight weeks?
She can,
you could tighten everything up.
You can,
you can certainly increase your endurance,
your threshold,
your ability to work.
How much could you increase your vo two Max and six weeks is a good question.
A few percentage points,
I believe.
Uh,
I think considerably less than that.
Really?
Yeah.
Hmm.
I don't know.
How much could you increase your vertical jump in six weeks?
Not much.
Not much at all.
I'm not a big believer in the idea that you're going to create big,
significant fight changing physiological changes in six to eight weeks.
It's not really my experience.
Um,
but I can show someone a single technique which can have a direct impact on a
fight.
I can show them that and five minutes.
Mm.
Okay.
Um,
I'm not gonna claim to be a medical expert who has a deep understanding of these
things about my experience in coaching is that physiological changes take time
and you're not going to get it done in a fight camp.
Yes.
You can make physiological changes over a year,
two years.
Absolutely.
George went up a weight division.
Okay.
But it took quite a bit of preparation to do.
So it didn't happen in six weeks.
What kind of strength training was he doing to do though?
I know he's very involved in gymnastics.
George George has primary physical training outside.
Is this gymnastics?
He loves it.
Um,
uh,
he also for a time did Olympic weightlifting less so now than before,
but,
uh,
there was a time that was a big part of it.
Um,
recently he started taking on a training in water with various fins,
et Cetera,
et Cetera to increase resistance.
And he's quite a fan of that.
But the truth is George go through,
goes through cycles and uh,
you know,
boredom is a factor.
He get bored at a certain
kind of physical activity and you want to try something new.
And um,
so he's gone through various cycles.
I can tell you this,
Georgia's strength has not significantly changed despite the various changes in
physiological training.
Like when he did Olympic lifting,
he wasn't massively strong with him when he did regular weight lifting or when
he did swim training.
I did,
I didn't feel like,
okay,
one made him stronger than the other.
Okay.
Um,
there's so many interesting questions and the one you just asked is okay.
Do I believe that strength is important?
Absolutely.
Okay.
Anyone,
anyone who says that strengths doesn't make a difference in a fight is just
straight up ignoring the obvious facts.
Is a reason why men don't find women because there's massive strength
differences.
There's a reason why this weight categories cause there's big strength was when
heavyweight and lightweight.
Okay.
Um,
strength makes a difference.
The pro proof of that is simple easy tool.
Why do people take anabolic steroids?
Because they know that strength makes a difference.
Okay.
And there's a reason why they are illegal because they do change the outcome of
fights.
So yeah,
strength is extremely important.
The question is how are you going to build it and then are you going to do it in
camp?
Is your fight camp can be based around strings.
That's a risky strategy.
Can you ready to get that much stronger in six weeks?
Um,
I've always believed that the whole idea of fight camp is to prepare an already
well trained athlete to get around the problem of one individual.
It's programming one individual to solve the complex problem that another
individual presents.
It's kind of like preparation for an exam so to speak.
And um,
for me,
the whole,
the whole thing,
every flight campus motivated by two very simple questions.
How are you going to win this fight and how you not going to lose this fight,
the entire structure of the campus based around that and almost all of it has to
do with tactics and techniques rather than changes in the physical body.
Now,
when George is in off camp,
when,
when he's out of camp,
is that when he would,
that's a period of skill acquisition,
uh,
trying to acquire new skills.
So that's when he would t I know he's notorious for taking trips like to Brazil.
You do your experimentation,
you know,
you bring in different perspectives at different person and you think,
hey,
this is interesting.
This has potential,
this doesn't really have much.
But then you,
you start changing things up.
Now,
do you have that same approach with all the fighters that you've worked with?
Uh,
depends on the context.
How they mixed martial artists.
Did they train with me full time?
Part time is,
it would depend on the context.
I can answer with regards to the squad.
Yeah.
Well I,
I'm what I'm,
what I was going to bring up as Weidman Weidman's approach.
Um,
uh,
you know,
coming from that elite wrestling background and then developing a lot of,
uh,
significant,
mixed martial arts skills,
he,
uh,
is in,
an unusual situation right now.
Right?
Where,
where does he stand in terms of like future opponents?
Like where's he at right now?
That's,
uh,
that's a tough question to us to answer.
Um,
uh,
Chris I think had probably one of the most meteoric rises into will came chip
level.
He literally beat twice in a row.
The guy that at that time was considered by most people to be the greatest of
all time.
His run up to that was incredible.
I'm sure you've commentated many of those funds until this kid who an animal,
that the timeframe with which she went from obscurity to world championship
level is incredibly,
should undefeated,
is insane what he was doing.
Um,
so there was this incredible meteoric rise.
And then there was a,
a short period after that where he appeared to be crushing great former
champions and the Mashiah Vito Belfort.
It wasn't just beating them,
he says smashing it.
Incredibly impressive.
Um,
and,
uh,
and then I think people were shocked by what appeared to be an unbeaten record.
And then 73 losses in a row and catastrophic iasis getting smashed by Luke
Rockhold,
getting KOD by a flying knee from yo over Merrill and getting dominated by gay
garden was saucy.
And then all the controversy that led to that stoppage.
So it was,
it was three in a row that on a guy who never even experienced defeat.
Right.
And so you go from no defeats to three catastrophic defeats in a row that
that's,
that throws everything off.
Um,
but then he rebounded with even gas and curd finished one of the toughest guys
in the division and he's not an easy,
you saw what guests on went on to do with yes.
Bisbing Bisbing and uh,
so yeah,
he's,
that was,
that was a great one.
It was a nice come back.
And,
but the question is,
where does it go from here?
Um,
uh,
and I don't have an answer for you.
I'm so sorry.
How often do you work with them on,
not often,
Chris.
Um,
Chris came to me as a student.
He was a student of met Sarah,
who's,
um,
one of my great friends and training partners from the Henzel Gracie Academy.
And Matt was having some medical issues and he said,
John,
you know,
can you take over this student of mine,
Chris Weidman,
this guy's incredibly talented.
I'd heard of Chris Cause you know,
we're linked schools fairly close by and people were telling me about this
amazing race lows,
you know,
uh,
incredibly talented picks techniques up.
And you know,
I always take these things with a grain of salt because people exaggerate and
stuff.
So Chris data coming in and it was all true.
This kid,
you can show them a teeny on Monday and by Tuesday is doing a better than you
are.
And uh,
he has a gift for physical movement that you don't see very often.
And guys that big,
um,
big agile,
highly intelligent and um,
uh,
and had at that time
a level of self confidence that was deeply impressive.
I would show Chris a guillotine variation and then five minutes later he would
be using it in a gym and then a month later be using it in an MMA fight.
I get it.
He,
he literally would see opportunities and immediately act upon them.
What I worry about with Chris is that in those three losses,
I'm not saying this has happened,
but what I worry will happen is it fighters who are typically very dominant and
what confidence fighters when they experienced a feet lose confidence and a big
pot of Croesus success was that ability to see opportunity and have the
confidence to immediately act upon it.
Um,
so my concern if I,
uh,
if I,
if I look at cresses,
will that still be there when he still had the same conference,
which was such a big part of his rise to the top,
will it be drastically altered by three losses?
And I'm,
I'm very pleased to say that it didn't appear to be so in the fight with guests
to he,
he,
uh,
he actually took a heavy hit at the end of the first round in that fight and
came back at eight.
It looked like he had,
he'd gone through those,
those,
um,
those three losses and come back,
come back strong and everything was fine.
So I'm pretty confident.
Uh,
Chris,
we'll go on to great success again at one,
knowing how good Chris is on the ground.
How shocked were you about the Luke Rockhold fight?
Uh,
it was a hard one for me to watch.
Um,
uh,
Chris stopped working with me after this second Anderson Silva fight.
We did most of that came together and then he stopped working,
um,
with me move further out onto long island.
He opened up a gym,
was Ray Longo and uh,
went back to train with Matt Serra and,
uh,
they,
those guys were incredible training camp.
They did a fine job getting them through the machine to fines,
et Cetera,
et cetera.
Um,
I went,
um,
uh,
I was at that UFC,
it was in Las Vegas and Conor Mcgregor was the main event and Chris was the,
uh,
Co main event.
And,
um,
uh,
the fight had an interesting beginning.
Um,
Chris was doing well with the take downs,
but,
um,
uh,
Luke Rockhold was doing a great job of controlling Chris's head with like fake
guillotines to prevent any kind of damage on the ground and doing a good job of
standing makeup to the feet.
So there was no really significant damage.
Um,
then they got into an interesting kickbox in battle where,
um,
uh,
it,
it seems to go in one direction,
then switched directions and increasing to be getting the better of it and
things look good.
And then there was just one episode where everything just came unstuck in a
second.
And I remember watching and it's like,
uh,
like watching a bad dream,
you know,
and um,
uh,
yeah,
it was shocking.
Chris through an ill advised wheel Keck.
Yeah.
Which is slow and telegraph and Rockhold took him to the ground.
And what I was most shocked with
was,
and I've seen it time and time again,
I saw it in the David Branch fight and sought in Leo Machida fight is Rockhold
top game,
if you fucking terrified.
Pretty impressive.
Very impressive.
Unbelievable.
I,
I attribute that not just his skill,
which I think is considerable,
but also to training on a regular basis with Daniel Carmia and Cain Velasquez is
just his wrestling,
his grappling,
it severely underrated.
Maybe not so now,
but his ability to control guys on the ground.
It's just terrifying.
An amazing job,
I hope.
Got very strong submission skills.
Yes.
People I didn't think talk about those at all.
And uh,
he submitted a good people and he's hit summit at Beth's been without one arm,
good team.
And suddenly some of his finishes like highlight reel finishes,
the beautiful,
um,
you know,
he's got tremendous skills.
Um,
he's big for the division.
Uh,
he's,
uh,
you,
you talk about a guy who,
uh,
Dominique's that pace and dominates the,
the ration.
He's no one can hold them down for any period of time is great at getting makeup
to his feet.
He wrestles the fence very,
very well.
Like all the Aka guys,
they're good on the fence.
Um,
he's a,
he's a very,
very impressive fighter.
I'm impressed with him and a lot of ways,
but his ability to control top level guys,
I just thought,
my thought was when he got Chris down,
like,
okay,
Chris is a worldclass grappler.
He's going to be able to get out of this situation.
That'd be scrambles to,
it's a lot happening,
but there was none of that.
It was just total control and ground and pound for a considerable period of
time.
Yeah,
it was rough.
It was rough to watch because it was one of those where you could easily make
the argument for it had been stopped sooner.
Yeah,
I think so too.
it was a rough one.
Um,
and now Rockhold is going to face Yoel Romero,
which is very,
and he's the freak of all freaks.
That's like that guy was made in a lab.
Yeah.
Isn't Yoel Romero with fighting dated Brunch?
No.
Did this happen recently?
Yes.
At Robert Whitaker got injured.
What happened?
The knee again,
most likely if I had a gas,
I don't think they released it,
but there's been an injury.
Maybe it's a different entry,
but um,
when did this happen?
A couple days ago.
Wow.
I've just flown to California and using the Internet.
So yeah.
So rock.
Good for you.
It was only two days.
All say that,
but a Rockhold and well now we're going to fight for the interim belt.
That's a huge development.
Yeah.
Big Development.
Wow.
Yeah.
Um,
that's uh,
I mean Yoel Romero.
That's um,
it's a different vibe.
Yoel Romero is probably the most uncontrollable man in the universe is a
difficult,
difficult posting to control in any aspect of the fight.
He's a fight as some parts of what he does.
Make no sense.
Like he's one of the greatest grace list of his generation.
Many people take them down.
Yeah.
He gets taken down all the time,
but they kind of control and he just springs back up.
He's not worried about being taken down.
I think that's part of it.
Yeah.
Cause he comes so hard with the upper body,
lower body open and um,
and you're right,
there's no consequence to it.
He can just get up whenever he feels like it.
Um,
he,
he has a greater propensity to change direction at speed than anyone else who
would have seen in my life.
People always talk about speed.
They're all,
you know,
this guy's font.
So that guy's spas to me,
the only kind of,
there's two kinds of speed.
They don't that impress me in fighting.
One is the speed of decision making.
Okay.
If you can make decisions,
good decisions faster than your opponent,
you gotta win a lot of fights.
And the other is your ability not to go in straight lines at speed,
but to change direction.
Speed of directional change is the most important kind of physical speed.
And fighting I'll get is plenty of people that weren't really that fast,
but they can change direction quickly.
And that's the kind of speed that counts and fighting.
So the two kinds of speed that you needed to be to be a fighter with speed of
decision making and speed of directional change.
And you see lots of fast people are,
there's a Hussein bolt as fast,
but he's not fast and directional change.
It's not his thing.
But the thing that Yoel Romero is there's this certain twitchiness to his
movement where it's so hard to read where he's going,
where he's going to be in the next half second.
That's,
it's just a handful to deal with that.
That is a very good assessment of what,
what's shocking about him and his ability to go from zero to 60 insist freakish
shin.
This is him at 40.
What was he like when he was 25 when this doesn't look like a 40 year old man.
Just everything is wrong.
Yeah.
It doesn't look like a normal person.
Like if you look at his body,
his proportions,
everything looks like something from a movie that doesn't there is,
yeah.
Yeah.
And that flying knee that he hit Chris with was like,
she,
she's Christ.
Yeah.
Now he could feel it.
And the audience,
it was,
uh,
it was terrible.
It's just the,
the amount of force that he can generate is just stunning.
But he's also a guy that's carrying around a tremendous amount of muscle.
And I wonder what kind of pace he can keep up.
You know?
And we saw that in the Whitaker fight,
you faded a bit and that fight,
one of losing that fight,
and we've seen it in several,
was fights a Tim Kennedy fight.
You faded in that fight and eventually came back to win.
But he's got so much to feed.
There's so much tissue,
you know?
Yeah,
yeah.
No,
he's a fascinating character and fascinating.
And again,
boy wouldn't you have loved to seen him in the UFC at 26 yeah,
I mean when he was just dominating everyone of the wrestling scene and now he's
as Nice as good as I get in Raceland metaled into every single world class
competition he ever answered.
Not only that,
but the best wrestlers in his weight division of that time.
He beat all of them like
crazy.
It's as good as he did it.
The hard to imagine.
Yeah.
All right John,
I think we've covered
basically enough or it's a,
we're three hours in here,
man.
Oh my God.
Is Lawson is longer than one of my Instagram posts.
Your Instagram posts are amazing,
by the way.
I'm a huge fan.
You're,
you're one of the few bright,
not true.
I have a lot of friends share them and they,
they didn't send them to me in text messages.
Occasionally you are breakdowns of technique and strategy and what is actually
happening.
I think they're critical.
I think your voice and what you're doing,
like with the squad and what you're doing for,
for Jujitsu as a whole and the way you're able to articulate that and break
these things down,
it's,
it's really,
really critical.
I think it's awesome.
Thank you very [inaudible].
Thank you.
And I'm really glad we finally got a chance to do this.
It's better than a meeting at Denny's.
Yes.
Well,
Denny's for meeting.
It was fun too.
What is your Twitter for people?
Is it just John,
Donna her on Instagram rather?
You don't have a Twitter?
I believe it's Danaher.
John Danaher.
John.
Yeah.
Okay.
Beautiful.
Thank you brother.
Cute.